from Jackson Hole for our audience
worldwide. This is Bloomberg
surveillance on television and radio.
We're sitting in front of the beautiful
Grand Tetons as we typically do in late
August for the Fed's annual gathering,
but this year under the glare of the
global spotlight, it feels different.
Good morning. I'm Lisa Abramo alongside
Tom Keane. And you can just feel the
different air this year.
>> Dramatically different. In 18 years
here, it's one of like 0708. There's
been a couple other years, but this is
absolutely unique. And it's not that
it's one thing unique. I think it's
four, five, six, seven ideas that fold
into the speech in one hour.
>> We had the idea of the political
potential interference or discussion. On
the flip side, the economics of the
moment quite distinct. We came into
2022, the pain speech, there will be
pain. 2023 from Fed Chair Jay Powell. He
talked about operating under a cloudy
sky. And then last year, the beginning
of accommodation. Where are we now with
the dual mandate in question?
>> Well, the dual mandate's in question and
we don't know. We have James Bullard
later and he put the dot always at the
bottom. Mike McKe's smarter about that
than I am. But yes, it'll be about the
framework. We're not going to get 50
beefs, 25 beefs raise. It may move the
markets. That's true. But the the
mystery here forward with the politics
is the independence of this central
bank, not only for America, but for the
international audience as well,
>> which is a reason why a lot of people
are looking at two particular
securities. on one hand 10-year Treasury
yields given the question of unward
inflation or getting under control and
then of course the dollar and how much
it has weakened or will weaken going
forward to me since the last Fed meeting
10-year Treasury yields up 50 basis
points right now hovering uh just around
that 4.3% the dollar down 2% weaker just
by 2% at a time where there's a real
question what is going to be the release
value
>> I'm glad somebody did their homework
here I didn't do my homework I'm going
farther out the curve serve Susan
Collins, uh, uh, Jim Bullet, and others
who say, "Don't do that. It doesn't
matter." I'm sorry. The 10-year yield
matters, but a 30-year bond through 5%.
We're really not there yet. That will be
important. And I look at the Japanese
paper is an international litmus system
with the own idiosyncratic Japanese
story. I'm sorry. You have priced down
yield up in too many places.
>> Yeah. Well, let's get to an incredible
lineup and we will be talking about that
as well. Coming up this hour, do not
miss this. Boston Fed President Susan
Collins, Adam Posen of the Peterson
Institute for the International View,
Punis Bank President Yahim Nagel, and
former Philly P Fed President Patrick
Harker. In the next hour, also uh the
incredible reaction to the speech,
former Fed Vice Chair Rich Clarid,
former St. Louis Fed President Jim
Bullard and City Wealth CIO Kate Moore.
But first, our ACE economics
correspondent Michael McKe is here
alongside us. Mike, what are we
expecting to hear in this particular
speech? Well, I think what you're going
to get from JPAL is a bit of a push back
to market expectations that a rate cut
is locked in because you've got two
things going on. A slowing labor market,
which would call for rate cuts, but
inflation starting to tick up because of
tariffs, which would call for at least
holding. So, where does he come down?
The markets at this point are pricing in
a rate cut. Does he want to push back,
get them a little a little more flexible
as we get more data? Yeah, and Mike,
stand by because we do have an
incredible guest with us here on set.
Joining us now, Boston Fred President
Susan Collins, who has been in this
meeting and coming here for what, 20
years, 20 some odd years.
>> Absolutely.
>> This one feels different, doesn't it?
>> Well, um there's a lot going on with
this meeting, I will say, and delighted
to be here with you. um the framework
review which we will hear more about.
Very complicated context obviously and
uh love to tell you a little bit about
how I'm seeing economic conditions in
the outlook.
>> So let's get into that. There is this
dual mandate that's in question the idea
of inflation versus labor. Where are you
in the continuum of which you need to be
most worried about?
>> Well, you need to be this is a time when
you need to be looking at the balance.
You need to be looking at all of it. And
you know growth has been slowing
recently but at the same time overall
economic fundamentals are relatively
solid and that's a context in which it's
not surprising to see the indicators
being mixed. Some are stronger and some
are a bit weaker. So you got to look at
the whole picture and not focus too much
on any one or two specific indicators.
>> There's a lot of people who are
concerned that you might be late getting
to the economy if you wait for
unemployment to rise significantly. On
the other hand, you might see inflation
rise fast. What about the compromise
that's been floated by some people that
you cut rate once and then you wait?
>> Well, so you do have to be thinking
about all of it. We cannot wait until
all of the uncertainty is behind us. You
got to make decisions in real time. So I
think that part is true. It is a complex
context for monetary policy because I
see upside risks to inflation related to
tariffs. already starting to see some of
that and downside risks on the labor
market side. And so it's about balancing
those features. Um, and I don't get
ahead of a decision that we're going to
make four month uh four weeks from now.
We're going to see data in between now
and then. But it's going to be about
balancing those to uh to really offset
our risks and focus on both sides of
that mandate.
>> Well, I know data is important, but it's
also backwardlooking. So what are
companies in your district telling you
about their plans for both employment
and prices?
>> Yeah, absolutely. Because I do think
that complementing all of the
statistical analysis that we are always,
you know, I'm a total data geek, right?
You got to be in this role um with what
we're hearing is really important. And
what I'm hearing is uh pretty consistent
with what I'm seeing in the data
actually. And so on um the labor market
side um while the uh job growth has
certainly slowed it's somewhat more
concentrated at the same time a number
of those indicators are quite healthy
and and so on that side of it there uh
you know I think that there arguments
for um taking a bit more time but I'm
very focused on how those upside uh
those downside risks are evolving and
then on the inflation side what I'm
hearing is that early days in terms of
the impact of tariffs coming through
into prices over time for a number of
different reasons. So, what I'm hearing
from firms around my uh district, which
is most of New England, and what we're
seeing in the data as we do that
analysis at the Boston Fed, are pretty
much telling a similar story from that
context.
>> I was looking at where inflation was the
last time that we were here and heard a
Jackson Hole speech versus now, and it's
crept higher. It's gone in the wrong
direction. When you look at CPI, it's
basically ground the same place in core
PCE. Why did there seem to be confidence
before that inflation was on a
sustainable path down to 2%. Why is it
no longer?
>> Well, you know, that underlying
inflation, I was quite confident a year
ago that that trajectory was back down
to restoring price stability. And in
terms of what I hear around the
district, high price level and concern
about inflation is one of the number one
things that I hear about, which is one
of the reasons I'm so focused on the
importance of that side of the mandate
as well as maximum employment. But you
know, the tariff impacts are significant
and we have done analysis in the Boston
Fed understanding that it's not just
direct imports, but the range of goods
and services that rely on imported
intermediate goods as well. A much
broader range. It would surprise many
people how many kinds of services
actually use imported intermediates as
part of what's happening there. And so
we are anticipating that over the next
couple of quarters, so the rest of this
year into early next year, inflation is
going to remain elevated and then my
baseline would be it would start to come
back down. But I don't rule out a larger
and more persistent impact. But to
Mike's earlier point, what is the harm
in cutting by 25 basis points or even 50
basis points? because would that really
cause runaway inflation at a time when I
know that the the chair has talked about
policy being relatively restrictive?
>> Well, it's about the balance, right? I
mean, the inflation side and again that
is what I hear about in every uh
conversation I have across the first
district which is most of New England.
And so it's about balancing
uh that commitment to restoring price
stability with an understanding that
preserving healthy labor markets also
really matters for for the public. And
so doing that balance, I would say it's
not a done deal in terms of what we do
at the next meeting. Um but a range of
of possibilities is on the table and
we're going to get more data between now
and then.
>> Definitely. And everybody out there
listening, um that's good advice. Wait,
don't bet yet. Uh, is it more likely
that we see a rapid rise in unemployment
because that tends to be what happens
when it starts to go up or a more
long-term but steady rise in inflation.
Uh, that would lead to inflation
expectations becoming on board?
>> Well, so from my perspective, the the
risks on the two sides have come into
rough balance. And so that's a really
complex context for monetary policy when
you you could see the unemployment rate
rising and you could see higher
inflation. Um you know my baseline is
not one that is as concerned about
inflation expectations rising at the
moment. Earlier in the year I had more
concerns about that. I would say that at
the moment monetary policy is kind of
modestly restrictive. That's actually
appropriate for a period when inflation
is elevated. we haven't brought back
price stability at which I am more than
I'm totally committed to but at the same
time there are those risks with the
slower employment growth that could lead
infl uh unemployment rates to rise and
balancing those risks. So I think at the
moment where we are is appropriate but
if we start to see worsening labor
market risks relative to inflation then
starting to dial back the restrictedness
would become appropriate.
>> And Dr. Collins, I was going to ask you
a bow tie question about the privilege
of taking your PhD under Rudy Dorn Bush
and what it means for the future of the
dollar and that unfortunately the
economist Donald Trump is watching.
Thank you, President Trump, for watching
uh this morning. May I quote, "The
United States is the quote hottest
unquote country anywhere in the world.
There is no other country that is even
close." And just think one year ago we
were a quote all caps dead country with
no hope of ever seeing all caps
greatness again. But that all changed on
election day November 5th 20124.
Many including Ken Rogoff of your
Harvard line up and say markets all-time
high economy okay inflation edging up
bond market speaking. Is the Fed too
exposed right now? Does the Fed just
have to wait because so many things are
firing on all cylinders as a president
just noted?
>> Well, you know, I am laser focused on
the data and the range of data from
what's happening in the relative short
term to what the indicators is
suggesting in terms of longer term
trajectories. I think as I said earlier
those underlying fundamentals are still
quite high.
>> Have we broken the disinflation vector
here or do we sit at this Jackson hole
where we got a service vector and a and
a goods vector nudging upwards.
>> Um I think my baseline is again it's
going to remain elevated for some time
related to those tariffs which are still
unfolding. There's a lot of uncertainty
with that but it's possible that we'll
see more persistence. There a lot of
unusual dimensions of behavior right
now, which means that some of the
history doesn't give us as much of an
indicator of how things are going to
unfold. We got to realize that, but
again, we can't wait until all of that
uncertainty is resolved before we make
our decisions. Those fundamentals are
still healthy and keeping that balance
in mind of the mandate that Congress
gave us for price stability and maximum
employment is where I will keep my
focus.
>> We just have about 30 seconds. What's
Fed Cher Powell going to say? No one's
listening.
>> Um, well, I don't want to get ahead out
of the chair. He's going to talk about
obviously the framework. We have had a
robust process there which I'm, you
know, feel really good about and about
what he's seeing in conditions and the
outlook.
>> That was really good, really good
massaging. Boston Fed President Susan
Collins, thank you so much.
>> She's going to talk she said that she's
going to talk about economics. Yeah,
basically that was really the intent. I
mean look this is a complicated moment
and as you said I mean you've got the
president coming out and job boning at
the same time the economic story is
really complicated here that to me is
what I
>> there's an ambiguity to it I' I've seen
that from a number of people but kit
jukes at sock jin was brilliant today on
that just just hugely ambiguous
>> which is a reason why I think all these
different fed officials have completely
different views as well as the
economists and analysts coming up next
one of those views Adam Posen of the
Peterson Institute will be joining us
next is Bloomberg surveillance on
television and radio.
>> The last inflation report that came in
where you saw services inflation, which
is probably not driven by the tariffs,
really start shooting up, is a danger.
That's a that's a dangerous data point.
I'm hoping that that's bit of a blip.
So, I think we still have a fair bit of
information that we're going to get
before September or the whole fall to
determine what's what path we're going
to be on.
>> That is Chicago Fed President Austin
Goulsby. This is Bloomberg Surveillance
on television and radio live from
Jackson Hole, Wyoming, ahead of a very
different Jackson Hole speech from Fed
Chair Jay Powell. Tom, to me, I'm
watching markets right now and wondering
how much they are potentially hinged for
a pretty big move right now. Can we
break five straight days of losses on
the S&P? And do we see that sustained
yield drop on the long end ahead of what
a lot of people expect could be a
hawkish move from this Fed chair?
>> Well, we may have the speech it be a
hawkish move, but the answer is we don't
know. We don't know. We don't know. And
we're going to go line by line in the
speech. I am going to use the fixed
income market as a litmus paper. Not
only the two-year but curve steepening.
I'm going to go to twos 30s, not the
vanilla twos 10s. Adam Posen taught me
how to do that. And the answer is I'm
watching the 30-year bond. It's
different in Japan. It's different in
the US. It's different in u uh Italy
doing better than France right now terms
of yield. And the answer is it's going
to be very nuanced internationally.
>> Yeah. Which is a reason why a lot of
people from the international community
are here. Joining us now who has been
writing fire recently, Adam Posen of the
Peterson Institute for International
Economics, who has been pretty
aggressively talking about some of the
harmful ramifications from a new world
order. But before we get to all of that,
I want to get to how this is set up and
how this feels very different than
previous Jackson Hall meetings.
>> Thank you, Lisa, for having me back.
It's good to be back with you and Tom.
And you're right, it is different. Um
it's different inherently because it
will be Powell's last speech as chair
and he's had quite the tenure and uh
there's always the combination now it so
happens of his potential legacy speech
talking about the framework review and
the fact that the economic situation is
genuinely unclear but then of course
there's this whole overlay of the Trump
administration's
varated attempts to put pressure on the
Fed in an overt way using personal
attacks in using social media in a way
that is unprecedented and harmful.
>> I know that human nature is such that if
someone tells you what to do again and
again and again and you have somewhat of
a rebellious spirit, you want to do the
opposite. And I wonder how academics who
get together and who want to do uh what
they think is right are airing on the
side of being overly hawkish in order to
sort of thumb their nose at what they
see as political interference and
something that isn't their fault. Do you
feel that in some capacity?
>> I feel they're thinking about it. I feel
that they're trying to be very
self-aware of that. And there is a
history, Lisa, of central bank
independence. And Tom and I are old
enough to remember this that when the
Bundes Bank was like the leading bank
setting policy outside the US, whenever
a left-wing finance minister or for that
matter a conservative finance minister
would say, "You're too tight," the the
central bank would explicitly Han Stem
Meer would explicitly say, "You yell at
me, I'm not doing anything." So there is
that element. But I think what Pal has
said, what President Collins, who you
just had, has said is they are trying to
make the right call on the economy. And
in the end, I think if anything, they're
going to bend over backwards to not be
hawkish today because they want to show
that no matter what the Trumpies do,
they're going to make the call on the
basis of the economy.
>> Adam Posen with us with the Peterson
Institute as we welcome all of you
worldwide. Good morning on Bloomberg
radio and on Bloomberg television as
well to color this for you in the
limited time that we have. Dr. Posen's
essay in foreign affairs days ago sets
the table for a postamerican
uh world. Dr. Posen of course channeling
the economist Joanie Mitchell from 1970.
It was good of you to end the essay
looking at a parking lot where the
lights turned out. In the 70s the
inflation was 6.8%.
We've been running three-ish, four-ish
depending how Jason Ferman measures it
for me. The answer is, do you fear an
inflation back to the time of big yellow
taxi?
>> Yeah. Um Tom, thank you. I know you
curate foreign affairs articles for your
audience, and I'm grateful you've picked
up on mine, and I think people have been
missing the big picture. This is an
economic regime change. It's not just
the tariffs. It goes to the 30-year
bonds and the international flows that
you were talking about. And so is
inflation going to get out of hand? No.
Ultimately, no matter who pal who
succeeds pal, who Trump appoints,
>> right?
>> They'll be forced to turn around if it
gets big. But what you're going to get
is the stuff we saw in the early 80s,
you're going to get a steeper yield
curve. You're going to get a a higher
yield curve. You're going to get risk
premier. You're going to get more out of
the dollar.
>> Right. Can we go all nerd now,
>> please? Is there are you guys
>> What were we doing before? away from the
tank, right? They're away from the tank.
Full nerd with Adam Posen. Buried in the
middle of every textbook, chapter 20 or
so,
>> is in a chapter on insurance. Your essay
is that we've given up the ghost of us
being the insurer for the world in the
70s, in the 60s, post World War II. Can
we recover after Trump back to an
insured world where they trust America
to be the insurer? Just as some foreign
policy types talked about after Vice
President Vance at the Munich summit and
all the stuff against NATO, you don't do
it in a day. If the president realizes
the mistake, if the Congress steps up,
if there's an election and there
changes, we can go back. But you have to
think of it like Germany or Japan after
the war. You have to rebuild trust. You
have to invest. And the longer this goes
on, the longer the US ceases to provide
the kinds of insurance that it did,
other countries selfinsure. And so they
take money out of the dollar. They
invest in different institutions. They
make different trade deals. They try to
build things up. So the longer it goes,
the harder it's going to be to turn it
back. And everybody's worse off,
including the US, but they make the best
of it they can.
>> That's the big picture as you see it.
Some people would say that this was
already fracturing in other ways heading
into this. And we saw that uh in the
post-pandemic reality. But shifting to
the inflation side that Tom so rightly
picked up on if the Fed does cut by 25
or 50 basis points now and you do see
inflation pick up materially. What do
you see as the risk that they have to
hike materially next year? Something
that Ken Rogoff has talked about.
>> Well, I mean nothing against Ken, but
you and I have been talking about this
on your show for for a year and a half
that I
>> You're first. Carry on.
>> No, but I Anyway, but so I'm I'm aligned
with the brilliant Rogoff. It it's they
I think they are have a reversal built
in at this point because essentially
they're gambling on the fact that the
ourstar hasn't risen. They're gambling
on the fact that the recessionary
effects of the tariffs and the
anti-migration will more than offset the
inflationary effects. They're gambling
on the fact that long-term inflation
expectations will remain fully anchored,
which amidst everything else after the
last few years and after the attacks on
the Fed seems like a bad gamble. And
ultimately, they're gambling on the fact
that the um pass through of these things
is going to be very limited, which gets
us back to Tom's 70s analogy.
>> At the same time, if you look at the
unemployment rate of young adults 16 to
24, it's 10%. It's the highest it's ever
been outside of a recession. You see an
increasing number of people remaining on
jobless claims get receiving those roles
because they cannot get a job.
>> Doesn't the labor market worry you at
this point?
>> It does, but that's different from what
you and I were just talking about, Lisa.
This is what happens when you run a
terrible policy mix and you get
stagflation is you have no good choice
and then you're stuck worrying about
inflation despite the fact people are
suffering. This is the problem. It's not
because there aren't going to be
problems and aren't already problems in
the labor market. It's because the
inflation threat is worse at this point.
And if the Trump administration hadn't
done all the things it had done,
>> we wouldn't be facing this terrible
trade-off.
>> I noticed last night I looked at the
Neielson ratings and there were two
people listening in Wyoming as the Red
Sox beat the Yankees.
>> It was me and Adam. We were sitting in
our little He was in a pup tent. I'm in
a a little bigger tent. We were
listening to the Red Sox on our radio.
>> Oh yeah. Is that this is your transistor
radio that you have? Yeah. Yeah. I think
everyone's buying that out here. Really
good.
>> Do they have a chance?
>> Is that all you want to know today?
>> Yes, they have a chance. They always
have a chance.
>> Adam Posen of the Peterson Institute for
International Economics on Economics on
Policy and on the Red Sox. Thank you so
much for being with us. Tom, is that
what you were doing last night? the
whole night you were watching the Red
Sox instead of
>> No, it's on the You watch it on radio
and it's it's great. It's like they're
playing in August. The games matter.
We're not the Yankees.
>> Yeah. Well, in seriousness, this is
really the key debate. What is the
potential riskreward of cutting now? Not
just because of any political pressure,
but also because there is a sign of
weakness in the labor market at the same
time that those inflationary pressures.
>> It doesn't make uh good news for for
radio and TV, but the framework is
important. They did a framework a couple
years ago. They're going to change it
and maybe they change it with a new
humility.
>> Yeah. Well, we'll be talking about the
framework. We'll also be talking about
the German central bank coming up with
the Bundes Bank President Yakim Nagel.
This is Bloomberg Surveillance.
[Music]
Can we break five straight days of
losses in this August l moments away
from the start of trading? I hear Tommy
saying that this is gloomy. Well, it's
less gloomy when you take a look at S&P
futures up about 3/10en of a percent as
we have just seconds. Meanwhile, yields
just slightly lower on the long end as
people look to potentially more hawkish
message from the Federal Reserve. The
Nasdaq trying to bounce back as well and
the Russell 2000 up some 610 of a
percent. We do have an open market at
this moment and we are looking at yields
that are uh lower on the day at least in
the long end. Front end is up just a
touch. When you take a look at what's
going on, expectations for a Fed rate
cut next month have gone from 90% to 7%
in the past
>> and they wait for the next tea leaf,
right? Including the speech.
>> Well, I mean, we've gotten some data
from it. It's not just tea leaves, but
yes, we've got a speech coming Didn't we
go to WEI and get rid of the brammo
gloom here and mention that year to date
we're in a raging bull market and dollar
sense of where we are coming from.
>> The DAX in Germany is a Saturn 5
moonshot of superiority.
>> Well, we're going to be talking in just
a minute with someone who has watched
that all happen with the recovery. I
will just say I have been talking about
how the S&P is up 13%. Since the last
time we were here and that the NASDAQ's
up 18% and this has been absolutely a
really strong market pretty much across
the world.
>> It's been a strong market and of course
that's part of the issue of why are we
cutting 20 the 50 beep rate cut that all
went away.
>> Yeah. Absolutely not in the market at
all.
>> But but again I I would say all in all
it's looking at equities, bonds,
currencies, commodities and we are in an
august doldrums which is going to end at
100 Wall Street. Well, maybe we'll see.
I mean, we've seen some speeches that
have left it in doldrums. I don't think
this time around, though. And I think
that's going to be important. One thing
that's been interesting is the euro
versus the dollar has strengthened about
4% since the last time we were here in
Jackson Hole. And someone who's been
watching that, but also watching their
own uh central bank policy. As someone
who has made the 11, 12, 13hour trek,
I'm actually my guessing is probably
somewhat longer than that. Bundes
President Yahim Nagle who sits alongside
us. Yakim, so great to have you here.
Uh, thank you so much for being here. I
want to start with a sort of overlay
that makes this Jackson Hole different.
It feels like there is the question of
central bank independence that no one
really wants to talk about, but is
something that's very much at the
forefront of your mind. How important
was that question in your decision to
make the trek out to Jackson Hall? I
think um as always the Jackson Hall
conference is an very important um
conference for for central bankers but
maybe this year even more important and
when it comes to central bank
independence um this is the DNA of good
monetary policy. This is the contio
scenic oneonone to do what we have to do
to fulfill our mandate to achieve price
stability and so central bank
independence we have to fight for it.
Do you have any fear that that has
already been compromised in some
capacity in the Federal Reserve which
people used to call the central bank to
the world?
>> Um, let me put it like this. I don't
want to comment on US politics. I hear
one or the other comments I really do
not like. But just to point out to give
you maybe a kind of a reminder when it
comes to the history of my country
Germany going back to 1948 and we are
grateful to the United States that you
gave us an independent central bank.
This was the starting point for the
famous German weds wonder. So central
bank independence is key to achieve
price to be really to build the basis
for economic growth. So we we have to
take this into account.
>> This is critically important and to me
this Jackson Hole is far more
international than any other Jackson
Hole I've uh been at. Bill RH's great
phrase central banker to the world.
Jerome Powell has to speak today to the
developed nation central banks and also
fragile EM central banks as well. What's
the message you need to hear from
Chairman Powell that reaffirms
independence at a central bank?
J. Paul gave many important relevant
speeches here in Jackson Hall and uh
this year I guess for him it's a very
important meeting. It's his last meeting
in this role giving such a speech and
what I expect from him he is an
outstanding excellent central banker and
what I expect from him to deliver a
clear message on price stability and the
mandate
of central bank of central banking and
this is price stability and so he gives
us this certainty we need in a very
complicated world.
>> I I want to ask this question. Bill
called me up this morning and said let's
get Naggle in trouble. So here we go. I
want you to talk I want you to talk not
about American exceptionalism but from
where we sit there's Leica
exceptionalism, Mercedes exceptionalism,
everything of Germany that we know. Tell
us now about the future of German
exceptionalism that you have to steer
forward with monetary policy.
>> I think Germany we are in a situation
this is definitely not an easy one. When
you take the second quarter numbers for
GDP, it was minus0.3. So this year we
expect maybe stagnation or a mild
recession. But what I can tell you and
what I can promise to you is that
Germany has the capability to adapt to
different situation. I think the world
is changing. We are not happy with with
the current situation. So the trade
conflict and everything is definitely
not helpful. But at the end we showed in
the past our let me say strength to come
back and have a strong economy.
>> Mr. Trump, can you in France and the
other leaders of Europe reaffirm that
growth that you that spirit of growth
that you had?
>> I guess we do something in the moment.
Uh we're going in the direction that you
alluded to. We have structural reforms.
We will do a lot of spending in in in
new investments over the next year. So I
think we do a lot of things in the
moment and I can guarantee you that
there is a strong coalition on the
European side. Germany, France, this
axis is working again and so I'm really
confident that we can achieve a lot
>> given the fact that you could see some
sort of mild recession in Germany. Are
you open to cutting interest rates
further after getting to 2% which is
sort of balanced? Is it appropriate to
become a little bit more accommodative?
>> Maybe a mild recession for this year.
Yes, this is true. But maybe we have
also to think about that next year
economic growth there's a high
probability that economic growth is
coming back. When it comes to interest
rate policy I believe that we are in a
kind of equilibrium. We have a 2% we are
on our target. This is good news.
Interest rates are at 2%. So this is an
equilibrium. So I do not see so many
arguments that brings me to the point
that we should do that that we should do
more here. So it it it's something. So I
believe that u inflation is not the
point anymore.
>> Inflation is not the point anymore that
now it's potentially gone.
>> We are on our target.
>> But this is the issue. If inflation is
not the issue, at what point do you see
risk of disinflation given the fact that
the euro has been strengthening, right?
That's importing disinflation. You have
the potential for uh Chinese uh goods to
be coming into the European region.
Cheap Chinese cars, that's sort of the
cliche that could lower prices. is at
what point are you going to be fighting
disinflation again?
>> Well, it's definitely not time for
complacency. So, taking for example um
service inflation is still very high.
It's above 3%. So, we have to we have to
have this wait and see attitude. So,
this meeting to meeting approach is I
guess the best way to do monetary policy
in the euro system. When it comes to our
September meeting, we will get new data,
new new projections and then we will
see. But at the moment if I take all the
numbers that I know PMI numbers I think
not giving me enough arguments to to
change the to change the bar.
>> How high is the bar to cut?
>> I think the bar is high and so it needs
a lot to convince me to change monetary
policy. The day after Russia invaded
Ukraine, I had the honor of David
Fulkurt's Lando
>> on and he was absolutely brilliant in
predicting the fiscal expansion, the
unleashing of a fiscal impulse across
Europe. You're providing leadership on
that. Is there a new nominal GDP to
Germany which makes the business process
that the Bundes Bank looks over more I
you're not going to like this phrase but
more Anglo-American more modern more new
world is there a new nominal GDP
permanence because of this fiscal
impulse
>> I think for Londo made a great analysis
uh in 2022 but let me take this
opportunity first to say Russia has to
stop this war. I think this unprovoked
war of aggression against Ukraine did a
lot of harm to us. I think first of all
this war has to be stopped and then I
can give you maybe my interpretation of
the current situation. Yes, you can say
well this was an eye openener for
Germany for the whole European Union and
we should take every step that is
necessary to become more competitive.
>> Do you see do you I I this is so
important I have to interrupt. Do you
see a new German political regime led by
Mr. MS or there'll be a new impulse by
Germany to say to Russia stop? I think
Fritish met the new chancellor he did it
right over the past couple of months
since he is in office. So he did a lot
of reforms. I think he put the right
things into the cupboard and say well we
have to improve on all the structural
issues and I guess it was the right
policy up till now but now we have to
implement all the things. Now this is
what I can say from a central bank
perspective. Now we have to come into
action. We have to do it. The money is
there. The funding is there. Now we have
to
>> is the will.
>> I think there's a political will to do
it. Definitely.
>> We're about 20 minutes away from the
Jackson Hole speech from Fed Chair Jay
Powell at a time where all of these
different international issues are very
much at the forefront. A big question
will be domestically how it sort of has
ramifications on rates and
internationally the currency blowback as
well. How independent are your policies
from what the Fed does? In other words,
how susceptible are you to either a uh
more dovish or a more hawkish Federal
Reserve.
>> I think central banking in a globalized
world is like family business. So we are
looking at each other for sure but we
are doing our own monetary policy. We
are checking our data. Yes, we know that
there are some spillovers from the US
policy to the euro system, but we are
doing our independent own monetary
policy.
>> One real ramification that people have
looked at so far this year has been the
dollar and how much it's weakened
particularly against the Europe in the
first six months. We've seen sort of a
plateauing out uh recently and I am
wondering how much of a concern that is
for you. I know that different people
have talked about levels at which point
it becomes a concern. Is there a point
where you start to say maybe the
strength is something we don't really
want? So when it comes to exchange
rates, I'm I'm often rare, let me say,
not too outspoken. What I can see when
I'm checking the data, if you take the
long-term mean of the exchange rate
between the US dollar and the euro, so
we are
>> pretty much on on this mean. So it's not
not something that is maybe producing
too much too many consumers.
>> I'm Mr. Outdoors and so I have a
question. Do the Tetons compare to the
ipsy loop?
>> Oh yeah, you also have incredible
language.
>> Is this like even close to the hills are
alive with the sound of music?
>> I did a lot of hiking here. The titans
are outstanding. It's so nice to be here
and now I have to go back to the
conference it is a little bit something
you are a little see the nice scenery
but listening to a great speech that I
expect from Governor Pow. But you can be
very proud to have this uh Titan
mountains here in the United States
>> commensurate diplomat to just avoid
talking about the Alps and how gorgeous
they are. But definitely
>> but you have to come to Bavaria. It it
is so nice.
>> We'd like to do a surveillance remote
from there.
>> I would agree actually and we'll sing.
>> I hope you hope I hope you will invite
me. I hope you will invite me.
>> Absolutely. Look out for that one.
Bundes Bank President Yak.
>> I'm thinking October. Thank you so much
for being here and we'll see you in the
Alps when we're singing uh the hills are
alive with the sound of music. Right now
we are just uh 18 minutes away from that
key Fed speech. Coming up next, don't
miss this. Patrick Harker, former
Philadelphia Fed president as we look at
a market that's calm up about 510 of a
percent now on the S&P and yields just
slightly lower on the tenure. 4.3% on
the dot. This is Bloomberg Surveillance
on television on radio.
[Music]
there may be a change because I don't
see any
um any chance that there's a nod toward
a September cut or any promise of a
September cut. I think he's going to f
focus primarily on the decision
framework and um not give any indication
of where he's leaning for September.
>> That was former Fed Governor Betsy Duke.
As everybody waits for that key speech
in about 14 minutes time, we will hear
from Fed Chair Jay Powell here in
Wyoming. This is Bloomberg surveillance
on television and radio. As we count you
down to that speech, we do see in
markets a sense of calm after five
straight days of losses, after a lot of
gains. Tom, we've had a big market gain
this year. We did see five, we had saw a
pause, an August pause, five days of
losses, and now we're up about a half a
percent on the S&P and seeing yields
come in just slightly. I
>> I take umbrage. We've forgotten what a
correction is. We've forgotten what a
bare market is and we've forgotten what
a 35% draw down is. I you know we could
still mention that markets were down for
five straight days
even though you did%
increase for the S&P 500. Uh this is
going to go in circles
what we're doing right now. Let's have
someone save us. Michael McKe is going
to join us and he's going to try to
weigh it on.
>> Am I going to save you?
>> You're going to save us. Absolutely. But
also who's going to save us is former
Philadelphia Fed President Patrick
Harker. Uh who joins us here on set
after a sojourn in Yellowstone. You
wonder why everyone knows now. Everybody
knows that you are hiking in
Yellowstone. We've been talking about
this with everyone that it feels very
different this time around. How much
behind closed doors do uh all of the Fed
members talk about the importance of
central bank independence? Is that
something very much at the forefront of
the mind?
>> It's essential. It's absolutely
essential. We know history, right? We
know when that gets lost what happens.
We know that in this country and we know
it in countries around the world. So it
is absolutely critical the independence
of the Fed. That does not mean the Fed
is not held accountable. I think this is
important. Independence doesn't mean you
get to do whatever you want to do. There
is still an accountability. There's an
accountability to Congress and there's
an accountability to the markets, right?
There's an accountability to the
American people more generally. So I I
think you can't lose sight of that.
There is an argument that ultimately if
there is a policy on the Fed whether
it's response political pressure or not
to ease now and then inflation picks
back up the markets will be the ultimate
arbiter right that that ultimately you
will see some sort of market reaction
that will be a natural check on whatever
that is do you ascribe to that
>> yes the bond markets I mean I look at
the bond markets uh equities you know
they're choppy they're always choppy the
the fixed income folks they're making
longer term decisions
And so that's what I watch and I think
that's right. They will police the Fed
in some ways because you know monetary
policy flows through the markets. That's
the implement of monetary policy not the
Fed. The Fed moves one rate the
overnight rate. It's the market that
make uh monetary policy work.
>> So today Jay Pal gets up with the
markets anticipating a rate cut.
>> Yeah.
>> What does he say? Does he care what the
markets are doing right now? Does he
make the point that there's a lot of
data? Does he open the door to a rate
increase or
>> cut cut?
>> The answer is yes. All those things I
think Jay will be cautious. Uh I think
he will try to my own sense move things
more to neutral. That is there's a
possibility of a September cut. I mean,
if I think back low these seven weeks
ago when I left the Fed, my last SEP, I
had two rate cuts in uh for this year. I
think that's still appropriate. There's
one other tool though that he's not
going to signal which I think is
important to put on the table, which is
the balance sheet, right? We're talking
about the rate cut, but the balance
sheet runoff. My own view is I think we
could the Fed should stop the runoff
now, right? And that's a signal that we
want to sit here and see how things play
out and then maybe in September a cut uh
or later. But I think the balance sheet
we often forget about it. Again, it's
small now because we slowed the rate. Uh
but it's still there and I think it's an
important signal that we want to sit and
wait. We're entering a period I'm
worried about. It feels it's not the 70s
but it does feel like stagflation light,
right? It doesn't feel great. when I
talk to my contacts, it there's
something that just doesn't feel right.
>> Well, what's the balance of risks right
now? Because we've heard a lot of your
former colleagues say, uh, we're worried
about the labor market, but it still
seems to be solid. We're worried about
inflation, although it's only ticked up
a little bit. We think it might in the
future.
>> So, I'm more worried about inflation in
some ways because the labor market
numbers are hard to discern right now.
You think we're shrinking the labor
force in some ways, right? And so we're
keeping unemployment steadyish. Uh it's
going to tick up, but steadyish. So
we're not going to see those big numbers
of 100,000 200,000 jobs. Part of it is
because the labor market's shrinking.
>> We are mourning here at this Jackson
Hall, a wonderful guy, Charlie Plaus
just died. He was head of the
Philadelphia Fed before you. I want you
to capitulate here, recapitulate here
right now. Freshwater optimism about the
American economic experiment that was
with Finn Kinland, Ned Prescott and
Charlie Pler and real business cycle
theory. Explain how that innovation
isn't going to go away even with the
political intrusion of the moment.
>> No, I mean Charlie was one of my mentors
and I just have tremendous respect for
him. I was a director of the Fed when he
was president so I got to know him well.
I knew him as a business school dean
when I was a business school dean. uh he
made tremendous contributions to
education to economics and not just in
macroeconomics but economics more
broadly and so I he's going to be really
missed and he was an incredibly strong
and powerful voice for Fed independence
>> speak about centrist America centrist
Republicans centrist Democrats that took
you know within the criticisms of RBC
said you know what this is about America
and this is about our spirit is that at
risk right now.
>> Yeah. So, I label I used to people would
ask, "What am I, a hawk or a dove?" And
I say, "I'm an eagle because I'm from
Philadelphia." But now
>> I don't get it.
>> Oh god.
>> Ask the Ask Ask ask people from Kansas
City. They'll tell you all about it.
>> Sick bird.
>> But I consider myself right now a
radical pragmatist, a radical centrist.
We've got to get the center to rise up
in in the spirit of what Charlie and his
colleagues did. and reaffirm the
centrality of markets, reaffirm the
centrality of democracy. Those two go
hand in hand. You human agency is what
it's all about.
>> So, we're about 7 minutes ahead of this
speech. And one thing that you talked
about a year ago when we were sitting
here was something that stuck in my mind
for the rest of the year, which is that
at this point you are looking at
anecdotes with almost more importance
than the hard data that that gave you a
more real time view of things. How much
is that even more so now given some of
the questions around forget the politics
of the moment just the collection of
data the surveys that people aren't
responding to things of that nature.
>> Oh yeah. Yeah. Just look at employment
right? You have the establishment survey
the household survey those two aren't
quite adding up. There's a lot of
choppiness in that data right now. And
so yeah, you have to take that data
seriously and you have to be careful not
to make anecdotes data, right? But you
do need to listen to what people are
saying and people right now are sitting
on their hands. What I'm hearing from
lots of people is I need to let some of
this uncertainty. Now the only exception
to that are data centers, right? It's
roaring ahead. The only problem is we
don't have enough power uh to power
these data centers. But there are areas
of the economy that are growing, but a
lot of people are just waiting.
>> Can I note here? Mike wants to get a
question in. The temperatures dropped
since we started live.
>> Oh, it feels warm.
>> It's 43.
>> I'm not complaining.
>> Do we expect snow today?
>> Oh my gosh. It is actually warmer than
>> Tom is not an outdoorsman.
>> 42°. You can see Pat sitting there just
in his sport.
>> Understatement of you. Carry on.
>> Uh, I want to ask you about the fra the
framework review, which is something
that Mr. pal is likely to talk about
today. What's the most important change
that they are likely to make?
>> If you read the framework review, it was
written in a period where we thought
interest rates were going to be zero or
low forever, right? And inflation was
going to be under 2%. And so there was
that color to the previous review.
That's all going to be taken out
obviously. Uh and I hope it that the I
haven't seen the final, right? But I
hope that they then emphasize more a
balanced approach and more principles as
opposed to tactics. Right? We don't need
to get into the details of the tactics.
That's what the committee does. They
need to reassert the principles of the
dual mandate.
>> Well, going forward under whatever new
framework they have. uh do you think
they can eliminate some of the risk that
we saw coming into 2020 when JPAL here
unveiled the last framework which uh
less than a year later was being junked
because of co
>> yeah you know I get this question a lot
like before I went into every meeting
FOMC meeting did I review the framework
and that guided my decisions the answer
was no right you face the situation you
have in front of you and you deal with
the cards you're dealt with and So the
framework provides a broad broad sense
of where the committee needs to go but
daytoday meeting by meeting it does not
drive
>> wait this is too important this is
breaking news you read the Fed minutes
>> wow
>> I've been there of course he actually
listens too I am wondering though what
the riskreward here is and just to sort
of crystallize the moment what the harm
would be of cutting by 25 or 50 basis
points and you talked about how you
pencile that in it wouldn't be that big
of a deal. Are we just making these big
grand pronouncements about the same
thing that essentially it might make
sense to cut on the margins but not
necessarily go wholesale to 1%? I mean,
is that essentially what everyone seems
to be coalesing around?
>> I don't see how you would go 1%. Right.
I mean, that's not that's just simply
not in the cards. 25 basis points. What
matters is not the number, but the
signal it sends, right? Because what the
Fed is because it's 25 basis points
going to move to 10-year? Not really.
the the market's going to move the
10-year. It's more the signal of where
the Fed thinks the economy is, right,
and where it's going. That's why I like
the idea of pausing the balance sheet
runoff as a signal. These are signals,
not actual, you know, they're not going
to be reflected in people's mortgage
rates or credit card rates.
>> Before we let you go, how much are
people talking about who's going to come
in to replace Fed Chair J Pal?
>> Well, all the time. You guys are talking
about all the time.
>> Among the Fed members. Yeah, that I
don't know. I mean, I haven't really
part of my deal when you leave the Fed
is you have to sort of stay on the
sidelines for a while. I mean, obviously
people are concerned about that. It's a
very important position for this
country. Um, and so yeah, I I'm cheering
that for the team that making this
selection that they make the right
choice.
>> Patrick Harker, thank you so much for
being here. Really appreciate it. And I
guess go Eagles. Uh, Patrick Harker,
former Philadelphia Fed president. And
we are awaiting that speech from Chair
Powell who is going to be speaking here
in Jackson Hole in less than 3 minutes
time. Mike, we have been hearing from a
number of people the fear of a 70s type
of stagflation light. Not exactly 70s,
but that seems to be the emphasis so far
in the Fed speak we've heard so far.
>> Well, it's the data that we're seeing.
We're seeing a slowdown in the labor
market. We're seeing an increase in
inflation. But I think the emphasis at
this point would be on the light part of
it because it's nothing like what
happened in the 1970s. And this is also
very early in the process. We recognize
what's going on because of what we went
through the last time. So the Fed can
react and in the current framework and I
assume this will stay in in the the
future framework. Uh the Fed will do
whatever it needs to do to keep price
stability. That's going to be their main
focus. And if that's the case, then
hopefully they are ahead of uh any
stagflation.
>> Totally unfair question to you, but I'm
going to go with it. With a new
framework, whatever it may be, does the
Fed become ever more expost after the
fact waiting for data? It's going to
depend on how you define it because what
the Fed is going to do is take out the
idea that we're going to make policy
based on what we think is going to
happen. And they're going to say, we're
going to look at all the data that comes
in. So it could be expost or it could be
just
>> consensus. Do the dots stay? Look, the
dots are it's all a communication tool
and how do you communicate? Maybe uh get
on Twitter. I will say that we are
waiting for Jerome Powell to uh come out
and give his speech. We're less than a
minute away. Unclear exactly how he
prepped for it. How do you think he
prepped?
>> He had breakfast at the Pioneer Grill.
You saw him?
>> I said good morning to the chairman this
morning and I did not see if it was I
didn't see if he went healthy or full
English.
>> Yeah, I can guarantee he didn't go full
English ahead of this, but uh this is
going to be a monumental moment for him.
his last speech at Jackson Hole as Fed
chair with the whole world watching.
Does he address independence? Does he
deal with the inflation side of the
mandate more than potentially uh the
labor market side of things? And
frankly, the international feel here
really notable as you mentioned.
>> To me, that's a major theme for me is
the international community is
screaming.
>> Yeah, Micah has some headlines.
>> The headlines are out. The the chairman
has started speaking and here is the key
phrase. Uh, the shifting balance of
risks may warrant adjusting policy.
That's going to get Wall Street's
attention because it's opening the door
to a rate cut. Here's the key sentence.
With policy in restrictive territory,
the baseline outlook and the shifting
balance of risks may warrant adjusting
our policy stance. The Fed is also
announcing its new framework, which is
pretty much as we were just talking
about with Pat Harker, dropping the
reference to the effective lower bound,
eliminating the inflation makeup
strategy, committing to contain
inflation expectations, and concern
about labor market shortfalls. But the
key here is that uh there are downside
risks to employment. The Fed chairman
says the inflation outlook is that it
will rise, but perhaps at a slower pace.
So, right now we are looking at a Fed
that has the door open for a September
17th cut. And I guess Lisa, we're
probably going to see the the long end
and the short end reacting here.
>> Well, let's pull that up right now. You
do see an absolute catering in yields on
the heels of this opening up to the
potential for rate cuts coming out. The
downside risks to employment are rising.
What you can see also rising. the S&P
500 now up uh 1.3%
yields down eight basis points on the
long end for the 10-year even more for
the two years
>> and looking at the inflation adjusted
yield the 10-year real yield comes in
six basis points that is substantial
it's still within the range but at 1.86%
86%. It's a real reversal towards a
presumption of Fed accommodation.
>> Yeah. And this comes at a time where
there is this question of how they are
going to message this given that
inflation has remained above that 2%
target since 2021.
Mike, do we hear anything about why this
is a Fed willing to look through that
kind of inflation? Uh it they do
anticipate that tariffs are going to add
to inflation and they think it will take
place over time, but they're still
looking, at least as Chairman Pal puts
it, they're still looking at these as
one-time price adjustments within each
sector. So, it's likely that inflation
is going to go up, but then they think
it stabilizes and might go down again.
>> Right now, let's take a listen to Jay
Powell, chair of the Tetto Reserve.
In my remarks today, I will first
address the current economic situation
and the near-term outlook for monetary
policy. I will then turn to the results
of our second public review of our
monetary policy framework as captured in
the revised statement on longerrun goals
and monetary policy strategy that we
released today.
When I appeared at this podium one year
ago, the economy was at an inflection
point. Our policy rate had stood at 5
and a quarter to 5 1.5% for more than a
year. That restrictive policy stance was
appropriate to help bring down inflation
and to foster a sustainable balance
between aggregate demand and supply.
Inflation had moved much closer to our
objective and the labor market had
cooled from its formerly overheated
state. Upside risks to inflation had
diminished, but the unemployment rate
had in had increased by almost a full
percentage point. a development that
historically has not occurred outside of
recessions.
Over the subsequent three Federal Open
Market Committee meetings, we
recalibrated our policy stance, setting
the stage for the labor market to remain
in balance near maximum employment over
the past year.
This year, the economy has faced new
challenges. Significantly higher tariffs
across our trading partners are remaking
the global trading system. Tighter
immigration policy has led to an abrupt
slowdown in labor force growth. Over the
longer run, changes in tax, spending,
and regulatory policies may also have
important implications for economic
growth and productivity.
There is significant uncertainty about
where all of these policies will
eventually settle and what their lasting
effects on the economy will be.
Changes in trade and immigration
policies are affecting both demand and
supply.
In this environment, distinguishing
cyclical developments from trend or
structural developments is difficult.
This distinction is critical because
monetary policy can work to stabilize
cyclical fluctuations but can do little
to al alter structural changes.
The labor market is a case in point. The
July employment report released earlier
this month showed that payroll job
growth slowed to an average pace of only
35,000 per month over the past three
months, down from 168,000 per month
during 2024.
This slowdown is much larger than
assessed just a month ago as the earlier
figures for May and June were revised
down substantially.
But it does not appear that the slowdown
in job growth has opened up a large
margin of slack in the labor market, an
outcome we want to avoid.
The unemployment rate, while edging up
in July, stands at a historically low
level of 4.2% and has been broadly
stable over the past year. Other
indicators of labor market conditions
are also little changed or have softened
only modestly, including quits, layoffs,
the ratio of vacancies to unemployment,
and nominal wage growth.
Labor supply has softened in line with
demand, sharply lowering the break even
rate of job creation needed to hold the
unemployment rate constant. Indeed,
labor force growth has slowed
considerably this year with the sharp
fall-off in immigration and the labor
force participation rate has edged down
in recent months.
Overall, while the labor market appears
to be in balance, it is a curious kind
of balance that results from a marked
slowing in both the supply of and demand
for workers. This unusual situation
suggests that downside risks to
employment are rising. And if those
risks materialize, they can do so
quickly in the form of sharply higher
layoffs and rising unemployment.
At the same time, GDP growth has slowed
notably in the first half of this year
to a pace of 1.2%. 2%
roughly half the 2.5% pace in 2024.
The decline in growth has largely
reflected a slowdown in consumer
spending. As with the labor market, some
of the slowing in GDP likely reflects
slower growth of supply or potential
output.
Turning to inflation, higher tariffs
have begun to push up prices in some
categories of goods. Estimates based on
the latest available data indicate that
total PCE prices rose 2.6% over the 12
months ending in July. Excluding the
volatile food and energy categories,
core PCE prices rose 2.9% above their
level of a year ago.
Within core, prices of goods increased
1.1% over the past 12 months, a notable
shift from the modest decline seen over
the course of 2024.
In contrast, housing services inflation
remains on a downward trend, and
non-housing services inflation is still
running at a level a bit above what has
been historically consistent with a 2%
inflation.
The effects of tariffs on consumer
prices are now clearly visible. We
expect those effects to accumulate over
coming months with high uncertainty
about both timing and amounts.
The question that matters for monetary
policy is whether these price increases
are likely to materially raise the risk
of an ongoing inflation problem. A
reasonable base case is that the effects
will be relatively short-lived, a
one-time shift in the price level. Of
course, one-time does not mean all at
once. It will continue to take time for
tariff increases to work their way
through supply chains chains and
distribution networks. Moreover, tariff
rates continue to evolve, potentially
prolonging the adjustment process.
It's also possible, however, that the
upward pressure on prices from tariffs
could spur a more lasting inflation
dynamic, and that is a risk to be
assessed and managed. One possibility is
that workers who see their real incomes
decline because of higher prices demand
and get higher wages from employers,
setting off adverse wage price dynamics.
Given that the labor market is not
particularly tight and faces increasing
downside risks, that outcome does not
seem likely.
Another possibility is that inflation
expectations could move up, dragging
actual inflation with them. Inflation
has been above our target for more than
four years and remains a prominent
concern for households and businesses.
Measures of longerterm inflation
expectations, however, as reflected in
market and surveybased measures, appear
to remain well anchored and consistent
with our longerrun inflation objective
of 2%.
Of course, we cannot take the stability
of inflation expectations for granted.
Come what may, we will not allow a
one-time increase in the price level to
become an ongoing inflation problem.
So putting the pieces together, what are
the implications for monetary policy? In
the near term, risks to inflation are
tilted to the upside and risks to
employment to the downside. A
challenging situation when our goals are
intentioned like this, our framework
calls for us to balance both sides of
our dual mandate. Our policy rate is now
100 basis points closer to neutral than
it was a year ago. and the stability of
the unemployment rate and other labor
market measures allows us to proceed
carefully as we consider changes to our
policy stance.
Nonetheless, with policy in restrictive
territory, the baseline outlook and the
shifting balance of risks may warrant
adjusting our policy stance.
Monetary policy is not on a preset
course. FOMC members will make these
decisions based solely on their
assessment of the data and its
implications for the economic outlook
and the balance of risks. We will never
deviate from that approach.
So turning then to my second topic, our
monetary policy framework is built on
the unchanging foundation of our mandate
from Congress to foster maximum
employment and stable prices for the
American people.
We remain fully committed to fulfilling
our stat statutory mandate and the
revisions to our framework work will
support that mission across a broad
range of economic conditions. Our
revised statement on longerrun goals and
monetary policy strategy which we refer
to as our consensus statement to save
time describes how we pursue our dual
mandate goals. It is designed to give
the public a clear sense of how we think
about monetary policy. And that
understanding is important both for
transparency and accountability and for
making monetary policy more effective.
The changes we made in this review are a
natural progression grounded in our ever
ever evolving understanding of our
economy. We continue to build upon the
initial consensus statement adopted in
2012 under Chairman Ben Bernanke's
leadership.
Today's revised statement is the outcome
of the second public review of our
framework, which we conduct at 5-year
intervals.
This year's review included three
elements. Fed listens events at reserve
banks around the country, a flagship
research conference, and policymaker
discussions and deliberations supported
by staff analysis at a series of FOMC
meetings.
In approaching this year's review, a key
objective has been to make sure that our
framework is suitable across a broad
range of economic conditions. At the
same time, the framework needs to evolve
with changes in the structure of the
economy and our understanding of those
changes. The Great Depression presented
different challenges from those of the
great inflation and the great
moderation, which in turn are different
from the ones we face today.
At the time of the last review, we were
living in a new normal characterized by
the proximity of interest rates to the
effective lower bound or ELB along with
low growth, low inflation, and a very
flat Phillips curve,
meaning that inflation was not very
responsive to slack in the economy. To
me, a statistic that captures that era
is that our policy rate was stuck at the
ELB for seven long years following the
onset of the global financial crisis in
late 2008.
Many here will recall the sluggish
growth and painfully slow recovery of
that era. It appeared highly likely that
if the economy experienced even a mild
downturn, our policy rate would be back
at the ELB very quickly, probably for
another extended period. Inflation and
inflation expectations could then
decline in a weak economy, raising real
interest rates as nominal rates were
pinned near zero. Higher real rates
could would further weigh on job growth
and reinforce the downward pressure on
inflation and inflation expectations,
triggering an adverse dynamic.
The economic conditions that brought the
policy rate to the ELB and drove the
2020 framework changes were thought to
be rooted in slowmoving global factors
that would persist for an extended
period and they might well have done so
if not for the pandemic.
The 2020 consensus statement included
several features that addressed the ELB
related risks that had become
increasingly prominent over the
preceding two decades. We emphasized the
importance of anchored inflation
longerterm inflation expectations to
support both our price stability and
maximum employment goals. Drawing on an
extensive literature on strategies to
mitigate risks associated with the ELB,
we adopted flexible average inflation
targeting, a makeup strategy to ensure
that inflation expectations would remain
well anchored even with the ELB
constraint. In particular, we said that
following periods when inflation had
been running persistently above 2%,
appropriate monetary policy would likely
aim to achieve inflation moderately
above 2% for some time. In the event,
rather than low inflation in the ELB,
the post-pandemic reopening brought the
highest inflation in 40 years to
economies around the world. Like most
other central banks and private sector
analysts through year end 2021, we
thought that inflation would subside
fairly quickly without a sharp
tightening in our policy stance as this
uh slide will show. Uh when it became
clear this was not the case, we
responded forcefully, raising our policy
rate by 5 and a quarter percentage
points over 16 months.
That action, combined with the unwinding
of pandemic supply disruptions,
contributed to inflation moving much
closer to our target without the painful
rise in unemployment that has
accompanied previous efforts to counter
high inflation.
This year's review considered how
economic conditions have evolved over
the past 5 years. During this period, we
saw that the inflation situation can
change rapidly in the face of large
shocks. In addition, interest rates are
now substantially higher than was the
case during the era between the global
financial crisis and the pandemic.
With inflation above target, our policy
rate is restrictive, modestly so, in my
view. We cannot say for certain where
rates will settle out over the longer
run, but their neutral rate may now be
higher than during the 2010s, reflecting
changes in productivity, demographics,
fiscal policy, and other factors that
affect the balance between saving and
investment.
During the review, we discussed how the
2020 statement's focus on the ELB may
have complicated communications about
our response to high inflation. We
concluded that the emphasis on an overly
specific set of economic conditions may
have led to some confusion and as a
result we made several important changes
to the consensus statement to reflect
that insight.
First, we removed language indicating
that the ELB was a defining feature of
the economic landscape. Instead, we
noted that our monetary policy strategy
is designed to promote maximum
employment and stable prices across a
broad range of economic conditions.
The difficulty of operating near the ELB
remains a potential concern, but it is
not our primary focus. The revised
statement reiterates that the committee
is prepared to use its full range of
tools to achieve its maximum employment
and price stability goals, particularly
if the federal funds rate is constrained
by the ELB.
Second, we returned to a framework of
flexible inflation targeting and
eliminated the makeup strategy. As it
turned out, the idea of an intentional
moderate inflation overshoot have had
proved irrelevant. There was nothing
intentional or moderate about the
inflation that arrived a few months
after we announced our 2020 changes to
the consensus statement, as I
acknowledged publicly in 2021.
Well- anchored inflation expectations
were critical to our success in bringing
down inflation without a sharp increase
in unemployment. Anchored expectations
promote the return of inflation to
target when adverse shocks drive
inflation higher and limit the risk of
deflation when the economy weakens.
Further, they allow monetary policy to
support maximum employment in economic
downturns without compromising price
stability.
Our revised statement emphasizes our
commitment to act forcefully to ensure
that longerterm inflation expectations
remain well anchored to the benefit of
both sides of our dual mandate. It also
notes that price stability is essential
for a sound and stable economy and
supports the well-being of all
Americans. This theme came through loud
and clear at our Fed listens events. The
past 5 years have been a painful
reminder of the hardship that high
inflation imposes, especially on those
least able to meet the higher costs of
necessities.
Third, our 2020 statement said that we
would mitigate shortfalls rather than
deviations from maximum employment. The
use of shortfalls reflected the insight
that our real-time assessments of the
natural rate of unemployment and hence
of maximum employment are highly
uncertain. The later years of the post
global financial crisis recovery
featured employment running for an
extended period above mainstream
estimates of its sustainable level along
with inflation running persistently
below our 2% target. In the absence of
inflationary pressures, it might not be
necessary to tighten policy based on
based solely on uncertain real-time
estimates of the natural rate of
unemployment. We still have that view,
but our use of the term shortfalls was
not always interpreted as intended,
raising communications challenges. In
particular, the use of shortfalls was
not intended as a commit a commitment to
permanently for preeemption or to ignore
labor market tightness. Accordingly, we
removed shortfalls from our statement.
Instead, the revised document now states
more precisely that the committee
recognizes that employment may run at
times above real-time assessments of
maximum employment without necessarily
creating risks to price stability.
Of course, preemptive action would
likely be warranted if tightness in the
labor market or other factors pose risks
to price stability.
The the revised statement also notes
that maximum employment is the highest
level of employment that can be achieved
on a sustained basis in a context of
price stability. This focus on promoting
a strong labor market underscores the
principle that durably achieving maximum
employment fosters broad-based economic
opportunities and benefits for all
Americans.
The feedback we received at Fed listens
events reinforced the value of a strong
labor market for American households,
employers, and communities.
Fourth, consistent with the removal of
shortfalls, we made changes to clarify
our approach in periods where our
employment and inflation objectives are
not complimentary. In those
circumstances, we will follow a balanced
approach in promoting them. The revised
statement now more closely aligns with
the original 2012 language. We take into
account the extent of departures from
our goals and the potentially different
time horizons over which each is
projected to return to a level
consistent with our dual mandate. These
principles guide our policy decisions
today as they did in the 2022 to 24
period when the departure from our 2%
inflation target was the overriding
concern.
In addition to these changes, there is a
great deal of continuity with past
statements. The document continues to
explain how we interpret the mandate
Congress has given us and describes the
policy framework that we believe will
best promote maximum employment and
price stability. We continue to believe
that monetary policy must be
forward-looking and consider the lags in
its effects on the economy. For this
reason, our policy actions depend on the
economic outlook and the balance of
risks to that outlook. We continue to
believe that setting a numerical goal
for employment is unwise because the
maximum level of employment is not
directly measurable and changes over
time for reasons unrelated to monetary
policy.
We also continue to view a longerrun
inflation rate of 2% as most consistent
with our dual mandate goals. We believe
that our commitment to this target is a
key factor helping keep longerterm
inflation expectations well anchored.
experience has shown that 2% inflation
is low enough to ensure that inflation
is not a concern in household and
business decision-making while also
providing a central bank with some
policy flexibility to provide
accommodation during economic downturns.
Finally, the revised consensus statement
retained our commitment to conduct a
public review roughly every 5 years.
There's nothing magic about the 5-year
pace. That frequency allows policymakers
to reassess structural features of the
economy and to engage with the public,
practitioners and academics on the
performance of our framework. It is also
consistent with several global peers.
Um to wrap up, uh I want to thank
President Schmid and and all of his
great Kansas City staff who work so
diligently to host this outstanding
event annually, counting a couple of
virtual appearances during the pandemic.
This is the eighth time I've had the
honor to speak from this podium. Each
year, this symposium offers the
opportunity for Fed leaders to hear
ideas from leading economic thinkers and
focus on the challenges we face. The
Kansas City Fed was very wise to lure
Chair Vocar here to this national park
more than 40 years ago, and I am so
proud to be part of that tradition.
Thank you very much.
[Applause]
That was Fed Chair Jerome Powell
wrapping up his annual Jackson Hole
remarks. What a Jackson Hole speech that
was. This is Bloomberg Surveillance on
television and radio live from Jackson
Hole, Wyoming. What we heard there is
they are prepared to uh move rates lower
on the heels of their dual mandate being
in conflict. We see a market uh market
reaction. We could see 10-year yields
are lower by 10 basis points. Two-year
yields, excuse me, two-year yields are
down by 10 basis points. the 10-year
yields down by seven basis points. What
you see is a weaker dollar, stronger
euro by some uh 7/10en of a percent
which you can see uh you can see the
dollar just weakening across the board
and you can see that increase on the
equity space. We have been getting some
other news. President Trump has been
tweeting saying that if Lisa Cook, Fed
Governor, doesn't resign, he will fire
her. There also was some drama in uh the
main hall of the uh Jackson Lake Lodge.
Bloomberg's Michael McKe is with us.
Mike, can you give us a picture of
what's been going on as Jay Powell was
speaking?
>> Well, uh it was I guess shortly before
he spoke. Uh Lisa Cook walked into the
Jackson Lake Lodge. She was not here
last night. I guess she's just arrived.
And James Fishbach, who runs Zora
Capital, he sued the Fed uh in court
trying to get the Fed to open its
meetings to the public. and the court
threw that out. But he was standing
there and started shouting at her, "Why
did you commit mortgage fraud?" He was
apparently, according to the Bloomberg
reporters who were there, escorted out
by sheriff's deputies.
>> Yeah.
>> I I think we have to be clear here that
these are allegations at the best.
Absolutely. That there are no charges,
>> no processes in place at this time.
Right.
>> No, no processes in place at this time.
And what we've seen from Bill Py from
the Federal Housing Finance
Administration and from the president
are fact they're trying to say factually
that she committed fraud and and there
is no evidence of that yet.
>> We will discuss that at a later point.
Right now we're just still digesting the
text of a 40 to 45 minute speech by
Jerome Powell. It really compares to the
8minut speech back in 2022. There will
be pain. This was this is a complicated
moment. the market sees it as maybe a
little less complicated and to really
digest what we just heard city chief
investment officer Kate Moore who's on
set with us in her beloved Jackson Hall
Wyoming and Kate what's your impression
I mean how much did what we just hear
from Fred J Powell change your view of
what their reaction function is going to
be
>> so it hasn't really changed my view what
I will say is in the last couple weeks
and talking to other people on the buy
side and really getting a sense for
investors you know people were moving a
little bit more towards the 5050 in
September, even if that's not what was
getting priced into the market. There
was the sense that this tension between
the labor market and inflation was going
to make the decision really difficult.
And I think what we're hearing this
morning is that, you know, the Fed is on
path to to start easing rates again or
proceed with the cycle. Um, but I don't
think that the rest of the meetings to
the end of this year and through 2026
are done deals yet. So much is going to
be data dependent. So I see the market
price moves and now uh with near
certainty for September and on through
the b balance of the year and I think we
just have to watch the data
>> right in watching the data and the
heritage of cityroup uh economics is
bouter Katherine man out the bank of of
England and all there's a complete
international and holistic view is this
this ginormous that's a that's a fancy
word CFA word folks this ginormous
investment that we're seeing in AI is
the cert certitudes of this summer. Are
they at risk given the tumult?
>> Well, I mean, Tommy, you point out
something. The market's been really
crowded. Most investor segments have
been crowded around these secular themes
and for good reason, right? These
companies are putting up great numbers.
Every company across every industry is
investing in AI and technology. So, if
you had uncertainty around policy or
economic growth or geopolitical tensions
or international relations or, you know,
fractures in the US consumer, everyone
was crowded in this space. That said,
they're not crowded because these are
companies with um these are they're
crowded because these companies have
great fundamentals and the path forward
looks great. But what we'll have to see
as we go into the back end of the year
if we get okay growth numbers or if we
get inflation that's a little bit too
perky. Um if we get rotations in the
market, I think some of the rotations in
August into the small gap was
unwarranted in my view. So, we are
sitting here after digesting that speech
and I'm going to have to go read it
about three more times to really
internalize all of the complicated
messages laid out by Jerome Powell uh in
his last speech as Fed chair. Mike, uh
before we continue, Michael McKe here,
our chief economics correspondent. Can
you just wrap through some of the key
headlines once more so that we can
really understand just how big of a
policy shift in some ways this really
was? Well, it's uh a policy shift, but
one that has been signaled for a little
while, which is why the markets have
been buying into it. But Powell
basically accepted the market's argument
that it looks like the labor market is
weakening and that is a threat to the
overall economy. And inflation is
rising, but it may not rise as quickly
as the uh Fed had feared. And so
therefore the door is open to a rate cut
if we get supportive data from the CPI
and the uh employment report that uh we
get at the beginning of September. Now
the thing about what he said today that
I think is important is once you open
the door like that as Fed chair, it's
almost impossible to close it. It would
take a lot in these data points that are
coming out to change that view and the
market's going to go overwhelmingly
towards the idea of a rate cut. So he's
pretty much baked it in at this point.
So I think what then happens is it goes
to Kate's point about where we go from
there. Uh the focus will be on the other
two meetings this year and then what you
do into 2026. And I think if you asked
the chairman, he would say we don't know
yet. That's the data dependent part. But
for right now, we're going to give you
what you think you need.
>> And right now what you are seeing is
almost a certainty priced in for a rate
cut next month. But Kate, one other
thing you're seeing is weakness in the
dollar on the heels of this. Yeah.
>> Do you expect that to be very much a on
an ongoing theme and it just kind of
edifies it given that this is taking the
dovish dovish approach?
>> Yeah, you know, we had a pause in terms
of the weakening of the dollar after a
really vicious weakening in the first
part of this year. And I I've heard a
lot of currency strategists say, you
know, we're going to tread water for a
little bit. We've made a lot of the
adjustment. But if the market really
believes with high conviction that we're
going to continue on a rate cutting
cycle, you know, I think it's fair to
assume that the dollar would weaken a
little bit, I think most people would
say over the longer term they agree that
the dollar has been overvalued for
considerable period of time. Um, and I I
expect that we'll see a little bit more
of that adjustment. On balance though, I
think we're going to see, you know,
appreciation in some US assets,
particularly the US equity space, uh,
even as the dollar weakens a little bit.
And I'm hedging some of the stuff and
some of the concerns I have in the
portfolio around uncertainty and perhaps
picks up pick up in volatility in
September into the beginning of October
uh with a little bit of gold.
>> Interesting. We'll catch uh up with Kate
Moore. She's going to be sticking with
us, City Wealth Chief Investment Officer
as we uh get through all the headlines
and get some commentary. Joining us now
is someone who is very familiar with
these types of uh speeches. St. Louis
Fed President James Bullard who recently
was in the media talking about his
preference for 100 basis points of rate
cuts this year heading into 2026. Also a
potential contender I should say to be
the next Fed chair. Uh James Jim, how
much are you seeing what we heard from
Fed Chair Jay Powell and seeing anything
different that you would really say say
if you were at that podium?
uh he used the the uh speech to uh
solidify expectations for 25 basis
points in September. Uh I was expecting
that anyway. Markets were expecting
that. Um he leaned into the most recent
labor market report which was uh very
soft. Uh and so I think that's uh that's
a done deal. um he didn't say too much
about beyond that um uh what you want to
do with the October meeting or the
December meeting. I have said 100 basis
points you know going into 2026. So I
think you could uh adjust as you go
forward uh and and eventually get a full
100 basis points but I would go slowly
in order to watch the data and then on
the framework review I'm sure uh much
earlier in the year they they had
targeted that uh they would have the
framework discussion and that they would
use the Jackson Hole speech to talk
about changes to the framework. I did I
thought those were thoughtful uh and
they're well presented in this in this
speech and they're about what uh many
have speculated on. Uh so I think they
did about as much as I can on the
framework side.
>> Jim Buller, Tom Keenan, good morning to
you. I definitely consider this my
conversation of the day. You served a
lengthy term at the St. Louis Fed. You
have lived the decline of a greater
economy decades and decades ago in the
effort to provide for a resurgent St.
Louis. As a next chairman of the Fed,
whoever that may be, do they have to
manage for two American economies, a
technologydriven
exceptional economy and another, to use
a cliche, America flat on their back?
How would a chairman execute those two
Americas? just everything all the way
around.
>> Yeah, I think income and wealth
distribution have become more uh salient
topics for the Fed. Uh it's not that
clear how much the Fed uh can really do.
Uh providing interest rate policy for
the whole economy. Uh if you change the
rate structure, that affects everyone,
not just one particular group that you
might be uh targeting. So I think uh
that's been something we've had to
wrestle with and I I've actually done
research on it myself to try to
understand it better uh from my point of
view. So uh I think this has been a been
a theme for a while and that'll be an
important theme in macroeconomics uh
going forward.
>> Mike McKe's got a lot of smarter
questions than me on the immediiacy of
this speech. I'm going to ask one more
distant question. and Jim Bolard, you're
at Purdue executing online technology
education every single day. How do you
define the new technology
productivity that America faces? Is is
it enough to save us? Is it enough to
really add on to our present GDP?
>> Oh, yeah. I think that the AI uh boom is
uh you know it's a general purpose
technology that will diffuse through the
economy. I think the key question is how
fast does that actually diffuse and uh
sometimes markets can get ahead of
themselves and think it's going to
happen sooner. Sometimes they're too
late and and it happens faster than
markets think. But but nevertheless uh
any way you look at it, it's an
important technology. It can drive
productivity and I think in higher
education is is one of the places where
you can really have the biggest impact.
We put a AI requirement in uh at the
Daniel School here for every single
student and we're trying to expand that
uh to all of Purdue. So uh I think that
just shows you how important this
technology is.
>> Jim, it's Mike McKe. I uh have a
question about sort of the process
involved in this speech. Uh the chairman
is giving his own speech, but basically
when he says it's time to maybe adjust
policy, he's speaking for the entire
open market committee. Going into a
speech like this, would he have pled
everybody? Does he think he has the
votes for that? Because we've been
speaking with Fed officials here in
Jackson Hole and there are still some
who are saying, "Well, we're not sure
that we need to do that yet."
>> Yeah. he's going to report on the center
of gravity of the of the committee even
though there might be people that uh
have misgivings uh at the June meeting.
Uh the committee had a median dot uh dot
plot of two rate reductions by the end
of the year. Um and I think uh the
minutes uh you know suggested something
that was more like 50/50 but then uh the
labor market report came in. I think
that tilted the balance. So he could
have he could have pushed back a little
bit. I think uh financial markets were
expecting him to come be a little bit
more hawkish here uh and try to set up a
50/50 meeting where you would uh wait
and see for the rest of the data to come
in. But I don't think that's where the
center of gravity is on the committee.
So uh so he went ahead and and leaned
in. I thought there was quite a bit of
talk about the labor market at the at
the beginning. uh you know you could
have could have been a little more uh
you know little more emphasis on the low
unemployment rate for instance and you
know he did come out at the end of that
discussion saying well it's in balance
uh but we're a little bit nervous so I
think um I you know I think he's
accurately uh uh describing where the
bulk of the committee is
>> well where would you be on this question
because we've heard the Fed officials
for some time now saying
uh we had poor job creation in recent
months, but the unemployment rate as you
just mentioned uh has been low and
they've described the labor market as
solid. Now, this seems to be sort of a
major shift in the way they view the
outlook and the sort of balance between
the two mandates.
>> Yeah. What I I he did at the end of that
discussion, he said, "Well, it's in
balance." Uh but uh I think the
committee's nervous. Uh I think it has
been slowing. Um and I think the policy
rate is moderately restrictive is maybe
you know 125 basis points above the
neutral rate. Is that really where you
want to be in this circumstance? I think
the answer is no. So you you can come
down some and still have moderately
restrictive uh monetary policy that puts
gentle downward pressure on inflation.
And then the other thing I think has
happened is that this argument uh from
Chris Waller and others on the committee
that uh the uh you know you should look
through the one-time increase in goods
prices coming from tariffs. Uh I think
that's carrying the day and you know
then he emphasized that inflation
expectations remain anchored and so on.
Uh and so I think that sets up uh a
modest move downward in September.
Jim, we've been talking with you for
years and you are very focused on the
discipline of economics. Right now, I'm
looking at the headlines that are
crossing from the past hour. The top
one, of course, is uh Jerome Powell, Fed
Chair, saying that shifting risks may
warrant adjusting rates. The second one
is that Trump says that he'll fire the
Fed's Lisa Cook if she doesn't resign.
As someone who is thought to be a
contender to become the next Fed chair,
Jim, how much does it concern you that
there's this increasing political noise
around the seat and exactly what the
path of policy forward looks like?
>> Yeah, I want to see due process around
something like this. Uh I I want to see,
you know, you can make charges against
anybody about anything, I guess, and you
know, the person can answer the charges
and and the DOJ can decide what they
want to do and and so on. Uh so I think
this has, you know, should have longer
to play out uh before you took that
step. Uh otherwise, it's just uh is kind
of the wild west and and she could get
reinstated later, I guess, or or
something if if there wasn't a
conviction. So, seems messy to me. Um, I
think uh these kinds of uh these kinds
of charges are made from time to time
against uh various officials around
Washington, but I'd like to see due
process there.
>> Jim, there's another question here and
aside from uh Governor Cook and what
happens there about how the perception
of political interference handles the
market reaction to Fed policy. There is
this perception that that could cause
the dollar to weaken more because there
is more of an emphasis on supporting
growth and supporting the labor market
than containing inflation. And some
people are worried that if the Fed does
cut by 50, 75, 100 basis points as you
were talking about this past week, that
you could see a move up in long-end
yields akin to what we saw last year. If
you were on the Fed currently and you
did see yields along the long end moving
up in response to near-term Fed rate
cuts, what would you do?
Oh, that would definitely be a concern
and and that's the tricky part of this
business is that, you know, you think
you're pursuing a a dovish policy at the
short end and and but the long end goes
up because inflation expectations start
to rise, markets start to lose uh
confidence in the Fed and the
credibility of the Fed and uh that can
go very very badly uh and and
unfortunately fairly quickly. So I think
you do have to be com you do have to be
careful here. Uh but I'm saying that I
think the committee has room to maneuver
if they proceed carefully uh over the
remainder of 25 and the first half of
2026.
>> I don't want to get out front of the
debate here or the moment uh Jim Bowler
but what I would say to Chairman Bullard
and Mike McKe I got to turn to you. You
and I used to sit and look at the dots
and go which one is Bullard? I mean you
and I have done
>> it. fairly easy after a while to figure
out. I know Jim would probably agree
with that.
>> Chairman Bullard, as your first act, if
you take over the Fed is as your first
act to get rid of the dots.
>> Yeah, I've threatened to uh while I was
president, I threatened to withdraw from
the dot plot. Um I think this could be
done better. This was discussed at the
framework conference and former chair
Bernani gave a very nice uh
>> presentation and talk about uh a
quarterly monetary policy report, get
more organized about it, put out a
forecast. I think all of that could be
done. I've advocated that for a long
time and um so I I think that would uh
sort of clear up some of the
misconceptions around the dot plot.
Okay, this is really really important
folks as Jim Bullard made economic
history I would say a decade ago with a
small short paper forceful on regime
change. How do we get a new Fed away
from the guessing and the certitude and
the silly parlor game of it? Jim Bullard
with great respect. How do we get to
that more disciplined study around the
game of the Fed and regime change?
Yeah, I think uh regime uh switching is
a great way to think about uh uh the
global economy and the US economy and
how it operates. Uh there are relatively
long uh periods of time where uh you
might have let's say slow growth and
very low interest rates and then you
might switch to another time with faster
growth and higher interest rates. Uh I
think understanding that and
understanding how that affects uh policy
choices is a great thing to uh study
further and talk about further uh in the
years ahead. So um you know I think it's
very salient for what the committee
does.
>> Jim Bullard uh Fed former Fed president
of the St. Louis bank will be sticking
with us right now in markets. You can
see a cheering across Wall Street uh to
the opening the door to a potential rate
cut next month, potentially more. You
could see equities uh surging higher
across the different the different
indexes led by some of the more interest
rate sensitive sectors. The Russell
2000, you can see 10-year yields down
now about six basis points, even more at
the front end down 10 basis points. Uh
as people look to the prospect of the
Fed looking through some of the
inflation from tariffs, you could see
the dollar marketkedly weaker 117 on the
Euro dollar cross up uh 9/10en of a
percent in terms of just the percentage
rise up about uh a basis point. And
there's a real question here about what
this means going forward. City wealth
chief investment officer Kate Moore is
still with us freezing a little bit
because it is a little bit chilly here
Nippy in the morning. I am curious
though about what you're hearing in
terms of prospective Fed chairs and the
politicization of the Federal Reserve if
this is a Fed willing to heir on the
dovish side. Does that mean something
that materially is higher with respect
to returns and with respect to risk
appetite? Look, markets love certainty
and our investors love certainty and we
want a certainty in terms of the process
around making monetary policy decisions.
So I don't have any insight into uh who
might be named next Fed chair but what I
will say is if there is a sense that the
process is changing I think that will
lead to some pause and perhaps some
volatility in the market. You know our
expectation is that regardless of who
takes the next chair and what seats are
filled uh we'll have a continuous
continuation of the process of being
data dependent of being thoughtful of
having you know great debate and
discussion amongst the uh Fed governors
and their staff. Um but if that were to
change, I think that would introduce
volatility. I think the most important
thing for us right now is to recognize
that so much of the data um is going to
be, you know, mixed through the back
half of the year and that's going to
have a huge impact, I think, in terms of
investor sentiment. And I would suggest
even more crowding in some of the
favored trades. We tend to get uh
reactions like we're seeing in the
market now on a day when news breaks.
But I think we're probably going to see
extended rally here because people are
anticipating this rate cut. Does that
worry you in terms of a bubble forming
or some sort of uh excess spending that
would push up inflation because of uh
inflated asset prices?
>> Yeah. So I have been a little bit
worried actually about positioning. I
feel like I've been a little bit more
cautious, frankly, than some of my peers
on the street and saying, you know, uh,
people own the highest quality parts of
the market. It's quite crowded. Some of
the shorts when we're looking at some of
the fast money community are are very
similar across the board. And we've seen
people kind of shrug off concerns around
economic growth or even the techn
technological disruption across a lot of
industries. We've seen uh significant
improvements in terms of the earnings or
vision ratios. city economic surprise
index has moved up, you know, and all of
this together, I think, sets us up for,
you know, u a little bit of weakness if
there was a bad data point or if there
was a bit of a shock where there's a lot
of consensus positioning. Well, Jim, Jim
Bullard, I'd love to bring you back in
here. How much does that concern you
that sort of a bias to cut rates could
cause asset price inflation to get ahead
maybe of where the economy is?
Yeah, equities except for just recently,
equities have been doing very well uh as
they've digested the uh new trade policy
of the US and how that's going to play
out globally. Uh you've got the AI boom
going on uh really drive a driver uh uh
for the big tech companies and and uh
you know I do get concerned that uh
things we get ahead of ourselves. Sure,
it's a great technology and everything,
but uh how fast is it really going to
diffuse into actual productivity
uh in the economy? But overall, I I
would say uh you know, it's it's
possible that we'll get higher
productivity growth ahead and and uh
really a good outcome for the second
half of the 2020s here, much as we had
in the second half of the 1990s. All
right, let me talk to the chief
investment strategist, Purdue
University. Right now, I'm going to do a
double barrel question first to Dr.
Bullard and then to Dr. Moore. Jim
Bullard, as simple as I can, all of my
conversations, whether Yakam Nagel,
Bundes Bank, Kate Moore, City Group, and
on and on is about an elevated or
persistent nominal GDP. Do you frame out
that we're going to have an animal
spirit in the country? Whether it's
better real growth, okay, inflation, too
much inflation, okay, real growth, but
what we're talking about forward is an
elevated nominal GDP.
>> Uh if you think real growth is going to
be faster, then yes, nominal GDP growth
would be faster uh even if the Fed hits
its 2% inflation target over that
period. So yeah, uh you would see higher
fuh faster uh nominal GDP growth.
>> I mean I look at this Kate Moore and
it's a higher the matter. I'm really
surprised by your comments. I think
they're extremely important here. Back
to US quality etc. But it sounds like
modeling out through all the emotion,
the fear, the turmoil, the political
debate as we just saw in next to the
8-foot bear in the lobby. The answer
here is you're modeling out that we'll
be okay and there'll be a better nominal
GDP. It leads into revenue, etc.
>> Look, I think we're gonna have an okay
growth environment, but one thing we
keep on talking about is sort of the
Kshape, right? There are the halves and
have nots across all the different
industries, different consumer groups,
and so I don't think that we uh want to
assume that everyone is going to
experience strong growth in the second
half of the year. And we're seeing this,
of course, in the consumer companies.
We're seeing this across, you know,
segments of different households. We're
seeing this even in technology
companies, those that have made the
investments are reaping uh dividends
from it. So you, yes, we may have these
good headline numbers, but I think as
investors, we have to really pay
attention to what's going on beneath the
surface. And I think there's an
opportunity for differentiation over the
next couple quarters.
>> Um, we are looking at a market that is
moving. We are looking at headlines that
are coming. And I want to bring this to
you that Canada is planning to remove
retaliatory tariffs uh on many US
products in an olive branch to uh
President Trump and there is this
feeling that maybe some of the tariffs
are are funible that we are going to see
some of them removed or used as a
negotiating
>> I strongly agree with what you're
saying. This was sort of out there in
the ether last night but to see these
headlines is is another example we
adjust. Well, and that's one of the
reasons why there has been a focus on
the labor market. Fed chair Jerome
Powell speaking uh just moments ago,
really focusing on the complications for
the labor market.
>> Overall, while the labor market appears
to be in balance, it is a curious kind
of balance that results from a marked
slowing in both the supply of and demand
for workers. This unusual situation
suggests that downside risks to
employment are rising. And if those
risks materialize, they can do so
quickly in the form of sharply higher
layoffs and rising unemployment.
>> Some people might say that Fed Chair Jay
Powell is coming around to the Chris
Waller view of things that there is this
feeling of potentially the weakening in
the labor market taking priority over
inflation at a time where some of these
tariffs are put on, taken off, and
that's what we're seeing a little bit in
terms of negotiation this morning. Well,
the give and the take and it goes back
to Kate Moore's optimism on investment
in America and you see it in dollar.
Thank you New York for putting up that
wonderful uh dollar looney chart and you
see things adjust and you wonder, okay,
what do we do with China? What do we do
with Mexico with the the produce debate
and pharmaceuticals with Europe? Guess
what? There may be constructive
surprises as the certitude of the tariff
debate gives way. It makes it easier for
the next chairman and maybe maybe I'll
get out of triple leveraged all cash.
It's 50/50.
>> Oh, now is the time to definitely do it.
Yeah, for sure. For sure. Uh Jim, before
uh we let you get on with your day, I do
want to finish there that have we seen
from tariffs that there is this
fungeibility there that they get put on,
they get taken off and that right now
the path of travel is lower from where
we were maybe on April 2nd, not higher
again. And so you can look through in
another kind of way some of the
inflationary impact.
>> Yeah. I mean I think it was uh great to
reach a preliminary deal with the EU.
That's one of the uh bigger blocks in
the world. Um China put on the back
burner uh markets like that for now. Um
and then you've got Canada and Mexico.
Uh looks like we're headed toward
renegotiation of the USMCA.
uh which uh I think would be uh a fine
thing to revisit was scheduled for 2026
anyway. Uh so it's it's maybe a little
bit more settled uh than than it was
earlier this year and uh I think markets
are liking that. That's making it easier
to plan. So um so so far so good on
that.
>> Jim Bullard, former St. Louis Fed
president, uh joining us. Thank you so
much for being with us. maybe future Fed
chair. We shall see. The process is
ongoing. And City Wealth Chief
Investment Officer Kate Moore, before we
let you go, I just would like your take
on this. The idea that we are at a
moment where suddenly people are looking
through the inflationary ramifications
of tariffs. Are you seeing the same kind
of thing? And that's appropriate that
this isn't 1970s. This is a different
shock that usually is a demand shock in
the end. Look, I will say people have
been looking through the inflationary
impact of tariffs for the entirety of
the summer at this point. There's been
an enormous like roller coaster ride in
terms of expectations for end tariffs.
But what I will say is this, you know,
even if we're at a lower rate, I'm just
going to say 15% effective tariffs
relative to where expectations were in
the beginning of April, um I think we
have to keep our eye on the sectoral
tariffs. And this has potentially some
of the biggest impact for overall
earnings. and those are sticky and we
know and are likely to endure through
multiple different administrations. So,
you know, this give and take between
some of our trading partners around the
reciprocal tariffs. Um, we're watching
that. It's very hard to trade around it,
but I will say the sectoral tariffs are
going to be very important for our
outlook.
>> Kate Moore, you've been incredibly
generous with your time. Thank you so
much for being here. We will see you in
New York. City Wealth Chief Investment
Officer Kate Moore. If you are just
joining us, we did hear from Fed Chair
Jay Powell. He said that this actually
is a time where potentially they could
start to look to the shifting uh policy
dual mandate and what could eventually
come would be a rate cut in September.
Mike, it seems like that's what the
market is pricing in.
>> That's what the market's pricing in and
I'm fairly certain that's what Chair
Powell is referring to. But because
we're fair and balanced, I have to point
out that Carl Weineberg has uh messaged
and from High Frequency Economics and
said the chair didn't say cut, he said
adjust, which means they could raise
rates as well. Probably not in
September, though.
>> Yeah, I don't know. I'm not thinking
that that's actually uh at all what he
meant. What do you think, Tom?
>> I I think it'll be great to speak to the
former vice chairman here as well within
the what we heard there from Jim Bullard
and from Kate Moore, Mike McKe. To me,
what is so interesting here is the
outcome of the tariff debate. And the
answer is we simply don't know. Today,
it's Canada. Monday it will be someone
else.
>> Well, here's the thing. Uh tariffs are
bringing in a lot of money right now.
It's not that the other countries are
paying it. We're all paying it because
it's a tax on basically the consumer in
the importing country. But what the
administration seems to have done is
made up for the deficit we're going to
get from the big beautiful bill by
raising everyone's taxes and not telling
them that their taxes are going up. So
people are accepting it which may mean
uh as Bloomberg Intelligence is putting
out in a story today that those don't go
away that we get used to this higher
price level and get used to tariffs and
they stick around because they do add
revenue. It's coming out of our pockets
but they do add revenue to the
government. So what's the endgame? If
this is working and adding money to the
Treasury's coffers, then the president,
this president could use them in many
different ways, many different times to
increase revenue. So, I I think that
we're going to be living with this for a
while and the uncertainty it brings for
a while.
>> Well, let's take a listen to what Fed
Chair Jerome Powell had to say about
tariffs and what the impact is on the
economy. Take a listen.
>> The effects of tariffs on consumer
prices are now clearly visible. We
expect those effects to accumulate over
coming months with high uncertainty
about both timing and amounts.
The question that matters for monetary
policy is whether these price increases
are likely to materially raise the risk
of an ongoing inflation problem.
>> What you can see is the response is rip
roaring in markets with equities
surging, yields plunging on the front
end, yield curves steepening and a
dollar weaker. PIMCO global economic
adviser and former Fed vice chair Rich
Clarida joining us now. And Rich, what's
your take on what we just heard from Fed
Chair Jay Powell?
>> Well, I think the chair certainly
intended to open the the door pretty
wide to cutting uh in uh uh September.
Importantly, Lisa, uh he spent a lot of
time on balance of risk, which is what
policymakers do. But at the two key
junctures, he highlighted the balance of
risk to the labor market is to a weaker
labor market. And he basically indicated
that the balance of risk to higher
inflation doesn't appear to be a first
order uh concern in terms of persistent
inflation. So I think the message was
they think they're going to cut in
September. We get some more data and the
markets have reacted to that.
How much do you think uh that this is
partly to maintain the Fed's
credibility, not necessarily with
respect to the president, but that right
now if they get it wrong on the labor
market front that it is that much more
pernitious based on some of the job
owning by what we hear from the
president?
>> Well, yeah. I mean, the as the chair
said in the remarks, it's a curious kind
of balance in the labor market. the
payroll employment growth has been very
very weak in the private uh sector but
the unemployment rate has not gone uh up
and so they are really focused on the
balance of of risk look the Fed has a
dual mandate um it's costly to let
inflation move higher and stay there but
it's also costly to have a recession
with a rise in the unemployment and I
think Lisa you're correct they are
tilting uh in that direction now
>> it feels like a very different uh
Jackson Hole and this is something that
we've been talking about with all of our
guests today, Rich, that people have
come on and said there is a different
tone about central banking independence
and a question of how to communicate at
a time of such political interference.
What's your sense of where that was in
the speech that we just heard from Fed
Chair Jay Powell?
>> I think the approach the chair took was
to really focus front and center, Lisa,
on the dual mandate that's assigned by
Congress, maximum employment and price
stability. and the chair gave a very
reasoned and thoughtful uh analysis and
discussion of how they're balancing uh
the dual mandate uh risks. Um and I
think that's the J pal message uh to the
issue of Fed independence. We have an
assignment from Congress and this is
what we're doing to achieve it.
At this point, we also are dealing with
the headlines that are coming out about
Fed Governor Lisa Cook where uh at the
same time that Jerome Pal was giving his
speech, uh President Trump came out with
this truth post saying that he will fire
Lisa Cook if she doesn't resign. We did
hear reports that in the Jackson Lake
Lodge in the lobby, uh that James
Fishbach was screaming at uh at Lisa
Cook that why did she commit mortgage
fraud? What's your take on what this
does in terms of both the Fed
composition but also just the ability to
be clear-minded about making Fed policy?
>> Well, obviously understand uh just
looking at the headlines that you
mentioned uh my myself and don't know
the details or or the facts in this
particular uh situation. Uh but but
clearly uh we're in an environment uh
where uh Fed independence is is under
scrutiny. Um, and my conviction is that
notwithstanding all of the very relevant
factors that you mentioned that the
Fed's just going to keep doing uh keep
doing its job.
>> Richard Clara, Tom Keane here. Thank you
so much for joining us. Very valuable.
I've got two tasks I want to uh take
here that I think are important. You
recently said that what matters is the
institution. That this chairman and any
future chairman has to protect the
institution. What's the day one first
mandate to protect the institution for
the next chairman?
>> Well, I think first and foremost it's to
have in place uh a plan and
communication uh that will deliver
expectations of price stability. I think
the chair was right today to emphasize
that the Fed has to focus on getting
price stability because that's going to
deliver uh the ability to deliver
maximum uh uh employment. I've also
written Tom that the Fed is a is sort of
a complex and cumbersome institution
with 19 folks around the table and the
Reserve Bank presidents. But I do think
that is a strength uh right now of the
institution.
>> Right. Well, this is really important
because it's as fractious as a meeting
of the bond team at PIMCO. In the middle
of the speech Powell chneled a few years
ago at PIMCO the new normal. For a
moment, I thought Mohammad Alaran had
parachuted in to write the speech. What
is your optimal new normal for the Fed,
which Powell mentioned today? What's the
best new normal for the next Fed?
>> Well, I think a new normal would be
inflation moving down towards the 2%
target, which would let the next Fed
chair cut rates down towards a neutral
level. you know, PIMCO in 2014, we
rolled off the idea of a new neutral. Uh
uh and we've been operating in that new
neutral world now for more than a
decade. And and so I think well anchored
inflation expectations, getting tariffs
in the rearview uh mirror would allow
the Fed to cut rates by probably 150
basis points uh from here and achieving
that ultimate soft landing. So I think
that would be a good uh new normal
destination for the next Fed chair.
What risks are there to that given what
we're seeing with the dollar given the
fact that we really have a very high
level of uncertainty around which
tariffs are going to stick and how much
is going to get passed along to
consumers?
>> Sure. And I think the chair was was
right to point out that we are seeing
evidence of tariffs showing up in the
price indexes for uh imported goods but
but that's been offset to some extent
with a decline in services uh inflation.
Again, I think where they are focused um
is to make sure that what is an
inevitable increase in the price level
from tariffs does not over time result
in persistent uh uh inflation. And I
think the speech today addressed their
thinking right now, which is that their
baseline is that that will not happen,
which will give them the room possibly
in September to to cut rates.
Yeah, Lisa, I think it's important to
mention within the market check that the
market is putting on steam here an hour
after the beginning of the speech and
Mike McKe's bombshell headlines. The Dow
lifting up. I'm not told I can't leave
Jackson Hall unless Dow goes up a
thousand points. I'm getting pretty
close to it.
>> Well, it sounds like you're going to be
hiking for uh maybe another six hours
and then all of a sudden not so much. I
do want to know though about what this
does in terms of the currency
ramifications and where your preference
lies in terms of the good investment
backdrop because what we heard from Fed
chair J Powell was so vastly different
from what we heard from Hakeim uh Nagle
of the German central bank where he said
we have to focus on inflation and right
now that is more concerning to them than
trying to support growth by cutting
rates or being stimulative. the fact
that that is the framework there and it
is such a different framework here. Does
that make you want to invest in Europe a
little bit more?
>> Well, you know, I think I think one of
our themes at PIMCO is that we're in a
world where taking advantage of a global
opportunity set u makes sense. Also,
we're in a world where makes sense to
focus on valuations. And without getting
into particular markets or securities,
there have been some pretty big
divergencies between valuation in the US
and Europe, especially in in equity uh
markets. Also, you know, the Europeans
are much closer to their 2% target uh
than is the Fed because from the Europe
point of view, uh the tariffs are really
a a disinflationary
force. So we're at different points in
the rate cycle and that does open up
some good uh opportunities.
>> Richard Clara, you are definitive in the
mathematics, the modern mathematics of
our economics. Then you know we talk
about a new framework and it's a lot of
jawbon about process. Maybe it's what
are we going to do with the dots? What
are we going to do with the mathematics
of modern economics forward? Is it
diminished after all this turmoil?
You know, you know, Tom, you and I over
the years, decades now, have talked
about that a number of times and and and
my thinking continues to be the the
mathematics, the models, including my
own, are tools. They're a starting point
for analysis and discussion, but they're
not they're not handcuffs, nor are they
uh the destination. Um, and certainly,
uh, you know, the the the last five
years have been unusual uh with a
pandemic and all the rest. Uh, but I
continue to believe that models and math
are are tools, not handcuffs.
>> My goal right now, Rich, is to get you
on the short list is to be the next
chairman. So, let's talk tariffs here.
What is the clar mathematics of Trump
tariffs?
>> Well, as Mike McKe said, they are
raising a heck of a lot of revenue and
and I would agree with my Washington.
>> There you go. I think I think I think
Washington may very quickly get hooked
on the two or300 billion a year uh in
tariff uh revenue especially if you know
the initial cost of raising that revenue
is in the rearview uh mirror which which
I think I expect to be the case down uh
uh uh the road. Uh look, we're in a
different regime. And you know we talked
at PIMCO in June about uh an era of
fragmentation and these trends have been
accelerating uh and the destination for
global trading system and and global
economy is going to be very different in
five years than it was in the 30 years
of globalization. So I think to be uh
continued is the way I would answer your
question.
>> He's running. Is that what you think? I
>> I don't know if he's running. I know
Bullet's running. I think I think by the
time we get done with the show today,
we're going to have Tracy Aloway run.
>> I think that maybe we'll find out in
just a second, but I am
>> we will she's sitting here with us. I'm
sure she says hi back. Rich, I am
curious though going forward. This idea
of how inflationary tariffs could or
couldn't be given the fact that this is
a new world order. We were talking with
Adam Posen of the Peterson Institute
earlier and he was talking about how he
sees inflation as having nodes of the
1970s and potentially uh being really
pernitious. Why do you not necessarily
see that? Why are markets more sanguin
on that risk?
Well, I think simply because um this the
1970s
uh were a very ser experience uh uh for
the current group of policy makers who
who lived uh through it. Um and I think
there there were some important lessons
learned and one lesson learned um is
high and persistent inflation is is very
costly to the economy and I think
politicians learned that as well. Um,
and so I think that central banks have
earned a lot of credibility under
Vulkar, under Greenspan, uh, under past
Fed chairs in the US and abroad. And I
think that, uh, expectations of
inflation, uh, we're sort of in a world
in which the bond markets at least think
that over a 5-year period, the Fed is
going to do whatever it takes to get
inflation down, what I call 2 something.
And I think that's an important victory
that that central banks are still
benefiting uh, from. And I would expect
that and certainly hope that will
continue.
>> Richard Clar with us. For all you on
radio and TV, we've extended this
wonderful show with the huge market move
we see today off of the uh Powell
speech. I want to turn to Michael McKe
because my head's spinning. I've got
chairman Bullard, Chairman Clara,
Chairman Aloway, and the rest. So when
they're in the Oval Office and they're
sitting on the couches and President
Trump is going to turn to the people he
trusts here, let's start with the
Secretary of Treasury. What is Bessant
going to say to him about the
qualifications needed for a Trump
chairman?
>> Well, probably from Scott Bessence, you
would hear the importance of being able
to relate on Wall Street. It was put
once to me that uh the Treasury
Secretary's job in terms of the markets
is to be able to calm them down when
something is going wrong. And so that
would argue for a certain number of the
candidates uh maybe Miss Aloway fits in
that category. Uh that uh have that
gravitas uh to be able to do that. the
idea that you want to cut rates is uh
that's not really part of it because you
wouldn't be on the list if you didn't
want to cut rates at this point. So,
it's going to be somebody who is uh the
president will feel comfortable with.
Maybe this move if the Fed cuts rates,
he's more comfortable with a wider group
of people because he's started to get
what he wants.
>> And Joe Weisenthal.
>> Uh we could add Joe Weisenthal because
uh well, we don't know if if the
president is a country music fan. We'd
have to find that out first. But I think
going going forward, the one thing you
could say maybe out of this speech is if
it in an ordinary administration, which
wasn't going to be subject kind of the
whims of way Donald Trump does things,
this would have really given a boost to
Chris Waller because essentially what
they're saying is Chris Waller was right
that inflation look through inflation
from tariffs because it will be a
one-time price boost.
>> Yeah. Now the question is going to be
and ultimately is this going to be a
hawkish cut or a dovish cut in
September. Pimco's Rich Clarida, you've
been incredibly generous with your time.
Thank you so much for being with us as
we dissect that speech. It was a lot
longer than his prior speeches and it
was one that signaled the beginning of a
new rate cutting cycle. They have not
cut rates since December in 2024.
Just to give you a sense of what Jerome
Powell had been talking about in that
speech, he addressed a number of
challenges facing the Fed and his
forward projection on policy. Take a
listen to what he had to say.
>> When I appeared at this podium one year
ago, the economy was at an inflection
point. This year, the economy has faced
new challenges. Significantly higher
tariffs across our trading partners are
remaking the global trading system.
Tighter immigration policy has led to an
abrupt slowdown in labor force growth.
There is significant uncertainty about
where all of these policies will
eventually settle. While the labor
market appears to be in balance, it is a
curious kind of balance that results
from a marked slowing in both the supply
of and demand for workers. The effects
of tariffs on consumer prices are now
clearly visible. We expect those effects
to accumulate over coming months with
policy in restrictive territory. The
baseline outlook and the shifting
balance of risks may warrant adjusting
our policy stance.
>> This has sent markets absolutely surging
across the board in the equity space.
Let's take a look. S&P up more than one
and a half%. And as Tom was saying, as
the session grows on, you see those
gains just building. In the bond space,
you could see two-year yields uh
plunging by 10 basis points. 10-year
yields down by eight basis points.
Again, gaining steam, almost a certainty
that they are going to cut rates come
next month. Then you have the dollar
weakening dramatically. You see the euro
now 11728
as people look to the potential for an
ongoing uh accommodation even in the
face of of inflation that is still above
that 2% target. This to me, Tom, really
does speak to the moment that we're in.
People were expecting that maybe this
was going to set the tone and certainly
right now in markets it is.
>> Yeah. I have you have to wait to see
what the action is and the action this
morning was to bring in a rate a more
accommodative regime. I'm sorry. We
still have data coming up and they may
be sobered by the CPI data. I, you know,
I don't have a strong opinion on this,
but I got to look at the data. I think I
trust the data. Well, we have two
prospective uh Fed chairs here joining
us now. Tracy Aloway and Joe Weisenthal.
They also are the co-hosts of
Bloomberg's OddLots podcast. And I
believe you were actually sitting in the
lobby, were you not when we heard uh
James Aora? So, what what actually
happened? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, this is
this is really a different kind of
Jackson Hall that's fraught with that
political question. There's always
someone who jumps into the lobby and
says something, you know, but
>> this is the tone shift though because a
year or two ago it was about climate
change and now it's about mortgage
fraud.
>> Yes. No, there is. So now it's like a
direct attack of this sort of attempt to
maybe like change the composition of the
governor. There's always someone who
makes a scene, but this time obviously
more directed at this impulse coming
from the White House about changing the
board.
>> There's also just more security around
which I'm sure you've noticed. Plus,
there's more journalists around, which
kind of indicates that the story has
gotten even bigger.
>> Yeah. Although, Tracy, and this is
something that I know that we've talked
about before, this idea of the economic
discussion being so interesting at this
moment, whether it's immigration,
whether it's what's going on with AI,
whether it's the youth unemployment, and
based on what we heard from that speech,
he really was trying to massage that and
talk about his concern there.
>> Yeah. Um, I know you guys were joking
about me and Fed uh me and Joe running
for Fed chair. I'm just going to say
right now, I don't want it. I don't want
it. This is one of the most confusing
moments in economic history that I can
remember because you could make a strong
argument either way for staying the
course on rates, for cutting rates, or
for even hiking rates. We spoke to
Kansas City Fed President Jeff Schmidt
and he was talking about how if you look
at the Taylor rule right now, the Taylor
rule actually suggests that maybe we
should be thinking about a hike. I'm not
saying you have to stick to the Taylor
rule all the time, but it's something to
think about. Pro tip. If you want a good
habit as you go into autumn here, listen
to Joe read rather Joe Weisenthal's uh
newsletter. You had a newsletter within
the last 48 hours. You're talking about
a set of narratives for which narrative
today won within the Weisenthal
newsletter?
>> Well, look, today is about the
short-term cyclical, the short-term
question of the cycle. And as Tracy
pointed out, I think this is a very
interesting moment precisely because
there are many people, they're not
necessarily saying like, "Oh, we need to
hike right now." But they're not they
are saying like look there are
conditions in which when you look at
stock spreads unemployment and inflation
maybe many people you know if this were
sever woking up right now you'd say we
need higher rates and you didn't really
hear that from the
cut that we're talking about or do we
still maintain a green spanny anchor
where we're going to set up a trend here
of rate cuts. I think what the only
thing I can say or that I would feel
confident saying in response to this is
look the market does not see a deep
cutting cycle right I defer to the
wisdom of the markets whether it's one
two three whatever like by and large
this is not a market that thinks there's
a ton of room to come
>> Joe's still an efficient market
hypothesis guy
>> right now I'm watching the crowds gather
for the walk that we're expecting when
uh Fed chair Jay Powell comes out and we
are expecting him to be with some of the
other international leaders and we were
talking about the international tone
here at this particular particular
Federal Reserve Confab. How much does
that really influence, do you think, the
message that we're hearing from the US
central bank?
>> I mean, I think Pal has to walk a really
fine line here where he's clearly paying
attention to the US domestic economy.
That's the mandate, the dual mandate,
right? But on the other hand, you do
have other central bankers here and as
everyone knows, when when the US economy
coughs, the rest of the world catches a
cold and all of that. So, it's a fine
line. It's, you know, a diplomatic
exercise in many ways.
>> I also think like, you know, if the if
if there are questions about Fed central
bank independent or central bank
independence at the Fed, there's going
to be questions everywhere, right? Like
the US is like you would think like sort
of the gold standard globally for like a
good institutional arrangement and so
forth and you know aspired to by many
places elsewhere like if this is an
important debate here, it's going to be
an important debate. This actually was
the reason why Yahim Nagal really got
emotional actually talking about this
and really was really focusing on how
the United States allowed Germany to
follow the mold of an independent
central bank which allowed it to emerge
from World War II with a currency and
with an economy. I mean that to me is
really this ultimate key question. How
much does a loss of independence or even
perceived loss of independence in the
United States really trickle out into
central banking policy around the world?
I think the difficulty is no matter what
they do now, there's an optics problem.
You know, even if Pal really
convincingly feels that he should be
cutting rates, there are going to be
some people who say like, well, maybe he
felt the pressure from Trump and so he's
sort of doing it because of that reason.
Central bank credibility takes a long
time to build up and you could argue the
Fed has been building it up basically
since the 1980s now since Vulkar it goes
away really really quickly.
>> It goes suddenly. Suddenly is the
operative adverb. Now you guys spent
August in Alaska and the rural is you're
heading for Japan. Is it September or
October?
>> We're going to get to walk
and the guy with the biggest headache at
the walk right now is UA of Japan if he
makes an appearance. I just looked at
the Bloomberg, folks. The magic of the
Bloomberg on your cell phone is when you
need to look at the 20-year Japanese
piece, you can look at it. Tracy,
nobody's talking about this. Yields
unraveling, price down, yields up in
Japan. What does that signal to the
international central bank community?
>> I mean, I'm still kind of surprised that
Bessant was jawboning the BOJ recently.
like that that to me is like a new angle
in politics meets central bank policy.
That's all I'm going to say.
>> I just say look, you look at the last 5
years, there's a global factor to all of
this. You know, inflation rose and fall
everywhere and to like varying degrees,
etc., but almost every especially
developed market government is
essentially dealing with the same set of
questions all in unison. There's slight
changes at the margin. Inflation peaks a
little lower here, a little lower there.
But all of these stories are really
global stories. Could the entire like
sort of developed world?
>> Can we talk about investment in America?
>> Give give me the wide shot right now if
you were if anybody's still awake in the
tent. Give me a wide shot here. And the
most important thing here at Jackson
Hall this year besides chairman is the
split rail fence behind us of which the
leaders of Central Bank World are going
to walk up to next. We have an
investment in a brand new split rail
fence at Jackson. The last one was
installed by Lewis and Clark.
>> Thank you for this breaking news, Tom.
This is really definitely the way to go.
>> This again is the investment of America
that you're going to see. We have a
spanking new fence.
>> Yeah. And it's going to generate energy
for uh all of the power centers that we
have to try to generate I
>> know this is kind of a joke, but I think
this is an important point here, right?
Because I was, you know, one of the
questions I've been asking, like we've
been asking lots of people, it's like,
okay, TW 2025 versus 2019, why is that
long-term rate higher? Why did market
expect there's just a lot of investment
going on globally part of this like
reshoring?
Yeah. Etc. And so I think, you know, I
think we should take the split
>> serious. There's capacity issues as
well, right? And the the thing about
this Jackson Hole is it resembles the
2021 Jackson Hole quite a bit. I think
you were both there at the time. You
remember the argument back then was,
okay, pandemic supply chain issues were
going to be transitory. We don't expect
them to feed into services, inflation,
just goods. You're hearing something
very similar right now when it comes to
tariffs, right? Like we think tariffs
are going to be a one-time price level
change, just isolated and goods probably
not seeping into services. I guess we'll
see.
>> Well, to me, this is the key question.
How much were people scarred by
transitory? And it seems like maybe not
so much. So inflation is all top of mind
for all of us, right? Think back to
2020. We hadn't seen interest rates like
much above zero for years and years and
years. We all remember inflation now.
I'm sure a bunch of companies remember
the inflationary playbook now. So
indeed, which is a reason why
potentially they could adjust and adapt
and keep prices going higher. Tracy
Aloway, Joe Weisenhthal of Bloomberg's
OddLotss podcast. Thank you so much
both. And I just for the record, Tracy
is not in the running for a Fed chair.
Well, she just said she doesn't want it.
So, there we go. Exactly. She There we
go. So, Joe is going to run himself
right now. Let's take a look at markets
because it really has been a dramatic
move. We have seen equities across the
board shooting higher. The Russell 2000,
let's just focus on that, up 3.9%
as people looked the prospect of rate
cuts. The S&P up 1.6%.
The Y is in the next board, which is
bonds. You could see yields plunging
particularly on the front end with
expectations of a Fed that is going to
cut next month. What we are seeing is
across the board twodigit returns,
two-year yields, 5-year yields lower by
11 and 10 basis points a piece. 10-year
yields are lower by eight basis points.
Even the 30-year are responding, but not
that much. This is a yield curve
steepening that is global. And I think
that
>> 30 year would be a bigger move and it's
just not. Well, you aren't necessarily
seeing yields rise, which is a good
thing, but you also aren't seeing them
fall as much as people look to growth
and potentially inflation. If you play
this out in the currency space, it is
the story you would expect. Dollar
weakness in a significant way, down by
9/10en of a percent on the Bloomberg US
dollar spot. And we can see that across
the different currency pairs with the
euro, the yen, as well as uh the other
majors. Right now, I'm really focused on
the euro in particular given the fact
that we just talked to a member of the
European Central Bank about why they
will not cut and why they think they're
in a good place at 2% which I think is
notable.
>> I agree they're in a good place but
there's a wonderful debate about what's
next for the ECB. It's off the US radar
but again it's the I go back folks to
animal spirit to the nominal uh GDP.
They just don't have the technology
oomph that we have. So, is there right
now where it should be? No one. I don't
think Christine Lagard knows the answer
to that.
>> Well, Christine Lagard, I believe, is
here. Also here is Michael McKe, a very
similar person in ranking and stature uh
for us here at Bloomberg. And what are
we looking for? We are waiting for this
walk with global central bank leaders at
a time when potentially we could hear
more about what this cut really looks
like. Is it a hawkish or is it a dovish
cut next month? Well, I don't think
they're going to say anything that we
can hear. It's sort of set up that way.
But, uh, one of the things that this may
do is add some symbolic support for J.
Pal because he's going to be walking
with, uh, the three major central
bankers in the world besides himself who
all agree that central bank independence
is important. And at a time when Pal's
under political pressure, it's a picture
that's worth having for the Federal
Reserve. They're going to do it a little
bit differently this time. Walk down a
different ramp. So, we get a nice
picture of them with the mountains in
the background. Uh, but this has become
a staple of Jackson Hole. And
ordinarily, it doesn't mean a whole lot
other than it gives the TV networks a
chance to have pictures of the Fed
chairman here. In this case, it may mean
a little bit more.
>> It shows the marking of time. I had the
clearest memory of 07 was Stan Fiser,
the late Stan Fischer I should say, on
the phone down the walkway here on the
phone for three hours as the world fell
apart. How does the walk and how do
these meetings how are they different
from 15 years ago? Well, 15 years ago,
television was barely getting started
here. It wasn't such a big deal. And it
has now put a focus on the chairman's
speech that was never there before. This
is an academic conference. Now that
chairman Powell is done, they're talking
about uh academic papers, discussing
them in a way that uh university
professors do about things that will
happen years from now or trends that are
going to extrapolate out. The Fed the
Fed chairman's speech has now become a
focal point for Wall Street because
there's not a lot of other news in
August. And so that's the major change
here is that we're all here because of
that. And the other change with an aged
Allen Greenspan is it used to be the
chairman only spoke about monetary
policy, never the fiscal space, never
ever the dollar. Remember Phil Graham
taking Greenspan's head off one day over
that. Now everything's fair game, isn't
it? For each and every central banker.
>> Well, you watch uh J. Pal, he avoids uh
very strongly avoids anything uh that
would represent a judgment on fiscal
policy. The Fed doesn't have a choice.
it has to accept the fact that there's
going to be tariffs and that's going to
have an economic effect. So he talks
about that, but he will never say
whether tariffs are a good thing or a
bad thing. He won't even say what I'm
saying. Tariffs are a tax on you and me.
Uh so that when Alan Greenspan did that,
which was basically when we were running
a budget surplus and he endorsed a
Republican tax cut,
>> every other chairman felt like the the
Fed got its fingers burned there. And so
they're not going near that stove. They
want to stay away from fiscal policy.
Now the question is where does the Trump
administration go because they have
talked about giving the fiscal side the
Treasury Secretary the president more
control over monetary policy.
>> Right. Lisa, cut me off if we have to go
to the walk. This is an important
question for both of you. Are we beyond
the pandemic at this Jackson Hole?
>> That's a great question.
>> I don't know if we are or not.
>> I guess my question back to you would be
what do you mean by that? The supply
chain disruptions marked by the pandemic
have continued but maybe for different
for different reasons and the labor
market has been transformed and whether
that's the pandemic that accelerated it
or whether it's the post-pandemic
economy that I think is something that
they're grappling with.
>> Do those academics in that lodge do they
believe we're beyond the pandemic? I
don't know if they believe we're beyond
it, but yes, the pandemic, as Lisa said,
has had a completely uh has has changed
the economy completely for the future
because we've seen a move to work from
home and work from wherever, work from
Jackson, which uh Kate Moore is doing,
that sort of thing. Uh and it has had an
effect on the economy overall. We've
seen uh the baby boomers retire it
faster than they had been before. And
that uh raises questions about what the
size of the labor force is going to be.
So it had profound effects on the
overall economy that we're still going
to be dealing with for a long time.
>> There's something else that has changed
materially since 20 years ago, 30 years
ago, or even just 5 years ago, which is
the type of communication that the Fed
has to engage with has changed. And it
has changed with some of the political
pressure and some of the true social
posts that are coming out in real time
as Jerome Powell does speak. And it
raised the question, how does this Fed
message to the American people? We
actually want to be true to our dual
mandate and we are not politically
motivated in any way. And that was
something that Patrick Harker mentioned
that maybe this would be dovish in spite
of the political pressure to say, look,
we're not going to cut off our nose
despite it too. We are going to stick to
the economic data and we want to
prioritize some sort of soft landing
above getting inflation very quickly
down to 2%. Well, just there I mean what
you're saying encapsulates where we are
because the Fed would be reacting to the
tariff effects on the economy no matter
what. But now people are going to look
at all of this through a partisan lens.
It becomes a political thing. Uh, I was
talking with Ben Bernanki last night
here and he was saying, "It's a good
thing that social media wasn't around
when we had the great financial crisis
because you can only imagine with the
steps they had to take at the time,
>> how so many people would have reacted."
>> Lisa, I'm looking down the alley where
you and I played botchi one night drunk
when we came out of the the grill here.
And the the the press down there, folks,
you can't see this on camera right now
or radio, but the press is triple what
I've ever seen. And that's the reason
why security has also been triple or
quadruple as Tracy Aloway was talking
about because there is this renewed
focus for the political reasons let
alone the framework review. I'm sure
that all those journalists are very
interested in the details of the
framework review. But I have a feeling
that that might have been another reason
why they came here today.
>> I I just I I look at the moment we're in
and yes, we've got the market move. I
haven't looked. I don't know where Dow
futures are uh or that but we're lifting
Mike and it's sort of a allclear feel
into what you're expert at which is that
next inflation report that next jobs day
already. What's the gaming of those two
reports?
>> Well, it's going to take a lot in there
to change the Fed's path now because I
said earlier uh once you open that door,
it's very hard to close it. And the
interesting thing is going to be that uh
when we get that CPI report, we will be
in the Fed blackout period. So whatever
we get out of the jobs report will be
what the market sets its expectations on
until we get to CPI. The market may move
a little bit, but the Fed's not going to
have a chance to influence it after
that. So, we're looking at this rate cut
and then it becomes and we're I
guarantee you, Lisa and Tom, we're going
to be talking on September 17th before
the Fed meeting. We're going to be
saying, "Well, so what is he going to
say about the next meeting?" Cuz then
that's going to be the next question. Do
we continue the string of of rate cuts
or is this one and we wait for a while?
>> I mean, a little vignette here, folks.
Yesterday, the papers come out. They
won't let me see them. I'm a danger to
society. McKe gets them all and he
prints them out and he reads them just
like, you know, just like your freshman
year in in economics, Mike, within the
grind that you do,
where does this end up for the November
meeting, the December meeting into next
year, or are people like you just
completely focused on the 17th of
September? Right now, you have to focus
on the 17th of September, but I say that
economists are more focused on the 5th
of September for the jobs report and the
11th of September for the CPI report
because those are going to inform us as
to what the odds are that the Fed is
going to do something or need to do
something going forward into the rest of
the year. If inflation rises faster than
Chair Powell suggested today, then they
might have to say we're going to pause
for a while. Lisa, is it rude to ask
Mike if we can trust the numbers, the
jobs report numbers?
>> No, I think that that's very much uh you
could speak it actually not even in a
whisper.
>> Really?
>> Yeah.
>> Do you trust the numbers of the jobs
report? I'm not kidding.
>> I trust the numbers the jobs report as
that they are as good as they can be
under the circumstances. The people at
the BLS are dedicated public servants
who don't have a partisan bent to them.
They are more interested in statistics
than anything else. And yes, there are
problems with the surveys, especially
declining response rates, but that's not
a political effort to manipulate the
data. They're doing the best they can.
And as we've always said about the Fed,
they have to work with the numbers that
they have. There will be revisions, but
when they're making their decision, they
work with the numbers that they have.
>> We are sitting here in front of the
Grand Tetons waiting for uh the walk
with Fred Chair Jay Powell and other
luminaries. We understand Christine
Lagard among them as they walk out for a
picture with the uh Grand Tetons as the
backdrop as is the tradition for Jackson
Hole and the speech that we get at the
symposium of the Fed. We have not
necessarily heard that there is any kind
of movement yet. We will bring that to
you when we see it. What has been
notable is that the speech took longer.
There was a little bit of a delay with
him getting to the speech and it seems
like maybe this has to do with security.
Maybe it has to do with the sort of
import of the moment, but this has
definitely been a different type.
>> I was not I was not in the room, but I
understand one of the reasons for the
delay was that the audience gave him a
standing ovation as he went up to the
podium.
>> Very strong sense of trying to celebrate
him in his last speech.
>> An audible here as we await for the
walk. We have a beautiful shot uh for
Bloomberg Radio. It's of this
magnificent international architecture
of the Jackson Lake Lodge. Lisa, this
was the architect who put the series
together of the lodges. And we think of
them like North by Northwest, Alfred
Hitchcock, these gorgeous traditional
Americana lodges. And then 40, no more,
not 40, 60 years ago. OMG, they made an
modern international lodge. This lodge
when it was built caused an uproar in
the West. Absolute uproar.
>> Yeah. And Rockefeller, John Rockefeller,
very much present here. You could see
his name emlazed on a rock that is up
this trail here. I do want to bring you
some headlines that we're hearing from
other Fed members. Beth Hammock coming
out and saying, "I heard the chair is
open-minded about September. My
expectation is we will see inflation
continue to rise." She has been out
there talking about the importance of
keeping focus on inflation. She said we
may see unemployment continue to rise as
well. We need to maintain modestly
restrictive stance of policy. So, not
necessarily endorsing this wholesale
dovish policy as uh the market seems to
be taking and running with at a time
when inflation has actually crept higher
from the last time we were here. That
said, a one-time price shock as Jerome
Powell described it isn't something that
should derail the labor market. And one
thing that I thought was really
interesting, Mike, in the speech that he
gave was this idea that their dual
mandate when it comes into conflict,
they need to weigh them equally. But it
does seem like the labor market is
taking a front and center focus at a
time where inflation is still expected
to creep higher over the long term.
>> The last framework set up what to do in
case of tension between the mandates.
And they kept this idea in the new
framework is you look at both of those
and you see which one is going to move
the fastest in the wrong direction. And
in this case, Powell was suggesting that
unemployment that the labor market could
deteriorate faster than inflation rises
because the tariffs take time to work
their way into the economy. And so
that's their concern. And that is why he
is essentially signing on to the idea of
a rate cut because they want to make
sure they get ahead of the labor market
weakening. They have time to react to
the inflation.
>> Mar, I asked you this before, but I
think it's so important. We've got to do
it again. Do you assume this was stated
is a oneoff or maybe a two off rate cut
or do they set a vector here of three or
four whatever number of rate cuts?
>> Well, I think what it is is is set up
for one rate cut and he's not endorsing
a a continuing uh series of rate cuts.
>> Is that a radical change from previous
>> Well, it's a radical change in the sense
that the Fed was not committing to
September. And now while he didn't
specifically say we're going to cut, he
essentially did that the markets are
going to take it that way. Where they go
from there will depend on uh what
happens with the data in the economy.
And I would point out that September is
a month where they will give us new
economic projections and a new dot plot.
So we will get an idea of where they
think they're going to go from here and
how much more they think they're going
to have to do when we get to September
17th.
>> Yeah, we are sitting here as we uh talk
about what potentially will come down
the pike. six minutes late. This is
unusual for Jerome Powell. He is very
punctual usually. That's really
interesting.
>> It's not up to him in on the walk. What
they are doing, they as soon as he's
done, they start the first session, the
first paper. They discussed it and then
they have the discussion of the papers.
And I I'm told from our reporters inside
the the meeting who are sitting in my
chair uh that the session has wrapped.
So, we could see this uh any moment now.
They've got to get everybody together
and and walk out
>> very quickly here. What happens the rest
of the day and into Saturday here? The
press leaves, I leave, McKe stays. What
happens?
>> Well, you leave, but we don't leave. Uh
the rest of the day, we have another
paper and we have another discussion. Uh
then there is a lunchon speech today.
Ruth Porat uh from Alphabet uh is is the
lunchon speaker today.
>> Well, right now we do see Jerome Powell
walking out with Christine Lagarde in
tow. I believe Andrew Bailey also there.
They are all walking and talking as you
go down the staircase. Mr. Uda of uh
Japan Japan. A very long way to walk to
uh fly from there. As they approach the
family photo this year in front of the
grand
>> I can state in all the years I've been
here there's never been a photo like
this. This is the absolute first for my
comment on this of the international
audience standing up for the central
banker of the world. I I think you can
read some symbolism into it. I wouldn't
read too much, but uh because they
normally walk with a central banker from
another country if they happen to be
here, but uh the choice to have all
three of them go out there at the same
time is sort of an idea that uh we all
support central bank independence and we
probably will hear that from them.
Bailey uh UEA and uh uh Christine Lagard
are speaking tomorrow on a panel
together and I think that that will be
we've been told from the reporting from
our Bloomberg News colleagues in Europe
that that's going to be a message that
they deliver. Not maybe mentioning J.
Paul by name but mentioning the idea
that central bank independence is very
important.
>> Can we just sit on how historic this
moment is? the last uh time that Jerome
Powell will be giving this speech that
he just gave at Jackson Hole at the
symposium held by the Kansas City Fed in
the Grand Tetons. You have the head of
the European Central Bank. You have the
head of the Bank of England. You have
the head of the Bank of Japan standing
alongside the head of the Federal
Reserve looking out over the mountains
at a time of highly complicated economic
questions. And really to me goes to the
question of how they deal with it going
forward and how they fend off potential
accusations and job ownings from uh
administrations around the world.
>> In the single m tightest most in intense
30 seconds of this show today folks from
Jackson Hole was a gentleman from uh
Germany Yakam Nagel speaking Russia must
end the war. And for these central
bankers, particularly Madame Lagarde,
they're distracted by that war.
>> Mike, can you give a sense of the
international presence here this year
versus prior years? There typically is
an international presence, but does it
feel different this time around?
>> There are more international central
bankers here. And one thing that I found
unusual in the guest list is there are
central bankers who haven't been here
before from the Middle East. So there's
an expansion in the efforts by the Fed
to bring people into this situation who
are becoming more and more important. Uh
it's not just the big four central banks
but others who are going to play a role
in the future. So they're integrating
them into the discussions here because
uh certainly from Africa and the Middle
East you're going to have much bigger
economies going forward.
>> Mike McKay Adam Posen with us earlier
saying it is a postamerican world. talks
about a new economic geography for the
world. For these three central bankers,
do they feel less support from the
American central bank?
>> I don't think they feel any less support
from the American central bank. They may
worry that the central bank in the US
gets its powers crimped by the
administration. One of the big uh in
innovations of the Bernanki years was
the use of the swap lines. And if the if
the swap lines were to go away and the
president has criticized those then uh
that would worry them because it's the
way you can keep dollars flowing through
the global economy at a time when
dollars start to disappear. The Fed can
send them overseas and that's been a
very important way of keeping the global
system working. At times they used it
certainly during co
>> Am I right that this has been the
longest per walk we've ever had at
Jackson. They've restructured it this
year. They look I mean I mean Powell's
cut and chiseled, but you know I
Governor Bailey I think looked a little
peeking peeking as they say.
>> Well, we're up 6,000 ft above sea level
here, which is a lot a lot higher than
London is. You know, it's interesting.
Uh we use the term perw walk. It's the
old uh crime reporters term where the
the the police department would march a
suspect out so that the newspaper
photographers could get a picture of
them. And it's kind of a shortand. The
Fed fought us, the press for years,
saying it's not a perfect work. That's a
terrible term to use. And now they use
it, too. It's just it's just so
convenient way to explain what we're
doing.
>> Well, it definitely feels that way with
all of the cameras flooding. Uh let's
take a look at where markets are after
the speech and as they digest some of
the language. Yes, maybe Carl Weinberg
talking about how an adjustment could
mean a hike, but it doesn't seem like
the market is taking it that way. What
you could see in equities across the
board surging higher. If you take a look
at the Russell 2000 up almost 4%. The
idea that rate cuts will help the
smallest companies, the more leveraged
companies. Most of all, you could see
yields plunging more at the front end
than at the long end, down double
digits, 10 basis points, 11 basis points
on the two and the 5-year yields as
people price in a Fed rate cut next
month. And then maybe a sequence of
them. And what I think is notable here
before we go to the currency space, Tom,
is this idea we are seeing yields down
at the long end. Yes, maybe not as much
as at the front end, but this is
bringing the curved curve lower. This
isn't just an issue of front end going
lower and then inflation picking up like
what we saw necessarily at least implied
in markets last year when there were
strongly agree that we have the 10-year
real yield come in is still within
range. Yes, it's a lower yield, but the
drama there of of yield curve dynamics
really wasn't displayed this morning,
>> which I think is really notable. You are
though seeing the currency dynamics that
so many people had been expecting to be
in play. The dollar weaker, the euro
stronger, the yen stronger across the
board. Strength in other currencies as
people wonder if this is a a real
decision by the central bank of the
United States to allow inflation to
remain above 2% for that much longer in
order to avoid disrupting any type of
labor market strength that otherwise
could gain some cloud. Mike, if this had
been another type of Jackson Hole, we
would have been talking about the
immigration disruptions. We would have
been talking about AI and what that
means in terms of job losses or job
gains and productivity. And I just
wonder how they understand labor market
data at a time of such dramatic
transformation, not to mention the
demographic shifts. We're all getting
older. And who is going to really pay
for uh this economy and the debt that's
coming?
>> All our social security taxes are going
to pay for Tom here. Uh
the the academic papers that are being
presented here are kind of on those
issues. That's funny. I didn't laugh.
>> They're aimed at looking forward and the
challenges that central banks will face
with demographics and immigration etc.
Right now uh the problem for the Fed is
they have to deal with the immediate
which is the economy and its reaction to
the new fiscal policies that have come
into place. And in uh in the short run
uh what we're seeing is a labor market
weakening and the Fed uses that as a
proxy, their best proxy for what's
happening to the economy because if
people lose their jobs, then they don't
have money to spend and companies pull
back and the economy starts to really
slow down or actually contract. And so
that's the the marker they're looking
at. And as you see, uh saw Jay Powell
suggest today that that is the bigger
danger. the the risks are pretty
balanced, but if you had to pick one, it
would be that the labor market weakens
and that weakens the whole economy.
>> Well, let's take a listen. Fed chair
Jerome Powell had just delivered his
final speech in his position at Jackson
Hole and we had the uh per walk as you
talked about it with Andrew Bailey,
Christine Lagarde, as well as the Bank
of Japan's UEA as they support their
colleague in his swan song at the
Federal Reserve. Let's take a listen to
some of the out clips from what he had
to say. The baseline outlook and the
shifting balance of risks may warrant
adjusting our policy stance. Our policy
rate is restrictive modestly so in my
view. The stability of the unemployment
rate and other labor market measures
allows us to proceed carefully. While
the labor market appears to be in
balance, it is a curious kind of
balance. Longerterm inflation
expectations, however, as reflected in
market and surveybased measures appear
to remain well anchored. We will not
allow a one-time increase in the price
level to become an ongoing inflation
problem.
>> That speech has sent off an absolute
eruption in markets. You could see
stocks surging. You could see
particularly the Russell 2000 gaining
clout and you could see yields plunging.
We will continue to look at exactly what
the significance of this coming up. This
is Bloomberg surveillance.
[Music]
with policy in restrictive territory.
The baseline outlook and the shifting
balance of risks may warrant adjusting
our policy stance.
Monetary policy is not on a preset
course. FOMC members will make these
decisions based solely on their
assessment of the data and its
implications for the economic outlook
and the balance of risks. We will never
deviate from that approach.
That was Fed Chair Jerome Powell in his
last speech as the head of the US
central bank as he signaled that yes,
next month it would be live. They would
be cutting rates. That was the
implication at least picked up by the
markets and they ran with it. The
Russell 2000, I keep focusing on that up
3.9%.
this absolute screaming endorsement of
the idea of rate cuts as people really
price in what's to come and in the bond
space yields marketkedly lower at the
front end much more tempered move on the
long end
>> and and again it gets out to the the
performance of the American economy I go
back to nominal GDP and you know what we
may get to September 30th and I'm
shocked earnings may be okay the word
that chairman Paul would use is solid we
may get a better mag seven but I am
going to back at this historic meeting
just Just as we break, waving to the
former governor of the Bank of Israel,
formerly with JP Morgan International,
one of the giants of economics, Jacob
Frankle is here. And what Dr. Frankle
would say with all of his history at the
University of Chicago, it's a dynamic
space and things adjust over time. And
that's what Powell alluded to today. And
certainly currency adjusting as well as
you look at the dollar marketkedly
weaker although back from some of the
earlier weakness from the immediate
knee-jerk reaction from the speech.
Dollar spot index down about uh you know
just about 8/10en of a percent but
really the euro dollar cross the idea of
117 back again 120 in sights as people
look to a central bank Europe that
really is firm in that 2% level. Yes,
they were ahead of the Federal Reserve
when it came to their cutting cycle, but
nonetheless saying even with concerns
about weakness, we really don't want to
see inflation picking up again.
>> It's still the litmus paper the system.
But on Monday, when I get back, you
won't. But when on Monday, when we get
back, I'm sorry, fixed income is
becoming the new foreign exchange when
you correlate the dynamics between each
country to country to country. I don't
make I mean just as a complete aside
here to see Italy pricing their yields
better than France is that never has
that ever been in any realm of thinking
I've ever had.
>> Yeah. Well, this is a reason why Michael
McKether is such an international
presence here as you chart toward a busy
weekend for you because you are not
leaving. You will be here for all of
those speeches. What are you focusing in
on? What are we missing that we really
ought to be picking up on at a time
where some people Carl Weinberg saying
maybe we're over uh running too far with
this idea of adjustment meaning a rate
cut.
>> Well, I'll go back to something Tim Gner
once said when he was Treasury
Secretary. What keeps me up at night is
what I don't know is keeping me up at
night. Uh you don't know what is going
to happen going forward with inflation.
That's going to be the biggest question.
We can talk to companies and get a sense
of what they're doing with their
employees. The jobless claims numbers
will give us an idea, but when the
tariff payments hit those companies,
what are they going to do? Are they
going to absorb some of it or are they
going to pass it all along? And when we
see the market reaction like we're
seeing today, and you were talking about
good earnings for this quarter, my
what's going through my head is yes, but
what are margins going to do? And what
message will that send to investors? If
margins start to get squeezed, then how
do companies react? Do then they start
laying off?
>> Do we know are there hints yet?
>> Well, you get different answers from
different Fed people. When we talked to
Austin Goulby, he said people are
telling him that in the Chicago district
things are getting a little bit better.
They're able to live with the prices
that they're getting. And then when we
talked to Susan Collins, she says it's
it's it's much more difficult. Well,
this to me is actually something that's
really important, which is the region by
region and how different United States
regions are. You hear some anecdotes
from uh corporations that actually there
is still quite a bit of strength in the
labor market and confidence. You hear in
others not so much, that actually
they're worried about the prospects of
the labor market going forward. How hard
is it to aggregate all of this, the
different regions of the United States,
the different political persuasions and
what that does with sentiment in
different regions of the United States
and come up with some sort of cohesive
policy at a time where there's a
fracturing even within the United
States?
>> Well, it is difficult. At least we have
50 United States whereas Christine
Lagarde has to deal with 27 separate
countries who all will have their own
opinions. In this case, all all of the
people representing the regions of the
United States are part of one
organization. It it was part of the
great design of the Fed that you have
input from all around the country and
it's not just decisions being made by
the bankers in New York. But it is
difficult because you do have different
situations going on in different parts
of the country. If you ask Mary Daly,
she's got a tremendous uh a lot going on
in California and that area with uh the
AI growth and that sort of thing. And
then you look at uh Texas uh while the
president wants to drill baby drill,
drillers are stopping because oil prices
have gone down because demand has gone
down. And so that's going to have a
completely different impact in that
region.
>> Right now we are sitting here just to
wrap up what we have just heard because
to me this really has been a seinal
moment for markets heading into the fall
but also for central banks around the
world. This was the swan song for Fed
chair Jay Powell. his last big speech as
the head of the biggest and most
important central bank of the world
coming out and opening the door to
potentially cutting rates as soon as
next month talking about some sort of
adjustment that could come which could
be open to interpretation and markets
took that and they ran with that and
what markets are seeing right now is a
Federal Reserve that will rather heir on
the side of inflation remaining higher
for longer even if they could protect
the United States labor
>> continue to watch how everyone everyone
reacts to President Trump. The fact is
he's the change agent of the moment. And
to see what Canada did with tariffs
today, there's going to be 10 more of
those tweaks, announcements,
adjustments, and as Kate Moore said,
maybe that gets us to a better space.
>> But no tweet from Donald Trump yet on
what J. Pal has said, which surprised
me.
>> Well, maybe that actually is a bonus
because if the blessed that there could
be some interference, maybe uh the
better for the members here. Thank you
so much. That does it for us. This was
Bloomberg Surveillance.
[Music]